S5^\~ At 




MEMOIRS 



O F TH E 



LITERARY 



AND 



V 



PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY 



OF MANCHESTER. 






, I 



VOL. I. 



SECOND EDITION. 



LONDON: 



PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND. 
MDCC LXXXiX. 



M 






'«>/?,•. ....¦• <v, '<" 



TO THE 



K 



N G, 



THESE VOLUMES ARE HUMBLY INSCRIBED 



BY THE MEMBERS OF THE 



LITERARY AND PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY 



OF MANCHESTER, 



WITH THE 



PROFOUNDEST RESPECT AND LOYALTY 



AND WITH PECULIAR OR ATITUDE 



FOR HIS GRACIOUS PATRONAGE OF THE 



FIRST FRUITS OF THEIR 



INSTITUTION. 



THE 



R E F A . C E. 



TH.E numerous Societies, for the pro- 
motion of Literature and Philofophy > 
which have been formed in different 
parts of Europe, in the courfe of the laft and 
prefent centuries, have been not only the means 
of diffufing knowledge more extenfively, but 
have contributed to produce a greater number of 
important difcoveries, than have been effected 
in any other equal fpace of time. 

The progrefs that has been made in Phyfics 
and the Belles lettres, owes its rapidity, if not 
its origin, to the encouragement which thefe 
Societies have given to fuch puifuits, and to the 
emulation which has been excited between dif- 
ferent academical bo dies, as well as among; the 
individual Members of each inftitution. The 
collecting and publifhing the more important 
communications which have been delivered to 

A 3 them, 



VI 



PREFACE. 



them, have faved from oblivion many very valu- 
able difcoveries, or improvements in arts, and 
much ufeful information in the various branches 
of fcience. Thefe their modeft authors might 
have been tempted to fupprefs, but for the re- 
spectable fanttion of focieties of men of the firft 
eminence and learning in their refpe&ive coun- 
tries, and the eafy mode of publishing, which 
their volumes of TranfacYions afford. 

Though, in France, Societies for thefe pur- 
pofes have been inftituted in feveral of the pro- 
vinces, in England, they have almoft been con- 
fined to the Capital 5 and however great have 
been the advantages refulting from the refearches 
of the learned bodies, who are incorporated in 
London, it feems probable, that the great end 
of their inftitutions, the promotion of arts and 
fciences, may be more widely extended by the 
forming of Societies, with fimilar views, in the 
principal towns in this kingdom. 

Men, however great their learning, often be- 
come indolent, and unambitious to improve in 
knowledge, for want of afibciating with others 
of fimilar talents and acquirements : Having 
few opportunities of communicating their ideas, 
they are not very folicitous to collecl: or arrange 
thofe they have acquired, and are ft ill lefs 
anxious about the further cultivation of their 
minds. — But fcience, like fire, is put in motion 
by colliiion. — Where a number of fuch men 

have 



PREFACE. vii 

have frequent opportunities of meeting and con- 
vening together, thought begets thought, and 
every hint is turned to advantage. A fpirit of 
inquiry glows in every breaft. Every new dif- 
covery relative to the natural, intellectual or 
moral world, leads to a farther investigation; 
and each man is zealous to diftinguifti himfelf in 
the interesting purfuit. 

Such have been the considerations that have 
led to the institution of the Literary and Phi- 
lofophical Society of Manchester. — Many years 
fince, a few Gentlemen, inhabitants of the town, 
who were infpired with a taste for Literature 
and Philofophy, formed themfelves into a kind 
of weekly club, for the purpofe of converfing 
on fubje&s of that nature. Thefe meetings 
were continued, with fome interruption, for 
feveral years j and many refpe&able perfons 
being defirous of becoming Members, the num- 
bers were increafed fo far, as to induce the 
founders of the Society to think of extending 
their original defign. Prefidents, and other 
officers were elected, a code of laws formed, 
and a regular Society constituted, and deno- 
minated, THE LITERARY AND PHILOSOPHICAL 
SOCIETY OF MANCHESTER. 

This Society now prefents the first fruits of 
its inftitution to the public j and from the 
aiTiduity of the Members, and the correfpondence 
of others, there is reafon to prefume, that a 

A 4 volume 



vtii 



F R E F A C £. 



volume may be regularly fent to the prefs, every 
fecond or third year. The feleclion of the papers 
has been made with as much impartiality, and 
as ftrift attention to their comparative merits, 
as could be expedited, in decifions of fo delicate 
a nature. Yet the committee are fcnfible that 
a majority of- votes, delivered by ballot, is not 
an infallible ted of excellence, in literary or 
philofophical productions. This confederation^ 
they truft, will give them a reafonable claim 
to the candour of the reader, if there fhould 
be found occafion for its exercife : And they 
hope that Gentlemen, who have favoured the 
Society with valuable communications, will 
deem it no injuftice or difparagement, that their 
Effays have not been inferted, through the im- 
perfection of neceffary forms and regulations. 
They are preferved in the Archives of the Society, 
and may again come under review, when fub- 
jefts of a fimilar nature, to thofe on which they 
treat, are offered for difcuffion. * 

No fyftematic order has been obferved, in 
t!he difpofition of the mifcellaneous materials, 
which compofe thefe volumtsj becaufe fuch an 

* Several Diflertations, by Dr. Percival, Mr. Henry, 
and others, enumerated in rhe printed Report of the Society, 
were publifhed by their refpe&ive authors, long befoje 
thefe Memoirs were committed to the prcfs. 

arrangement 



PREFACE. i* 

arrangement would have required the completion 
of the work, before any part of it could have 
been committed to the prefs. 

The fanction which the Society gives to the 
work, now published, under its aufpices, ex- 
tends only to the novelty, ingenuity, or im- 
portance of the feveral memoirs which it con- 
tains. Refponfibility concerning the truth of 
facts, the foundnefs of reafoning, or the accuracy 
of calculation, is wholly difclaimed ; and muft 
reft alone, on the knowledge, judgment, or 
ability of the authors, who have refpectively 
furnifhed fuch communications. 



LAWS 



LAWS and REGULATIONS 

FOR.THE GOVERNMENT OF THE 

LITERARY AND PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY 

OF MANCHESTER; 

together with a 

LIST OF THE MEMBERS. 



LAWS. 

I. HpHAT the number of the Members of this 
¦*• Society, inverted with the privilege of voting, 
electing members, Sec. be limicted to fifty. 

II. That Honorary Members, refiding at a diftance 
from Manchefier, be eligible into this Society, provided 
no Gentleman be recommended, who has not diftin- 
guifhed himfelf by his literary or philofophical publi- 
cations ; r;r favoured the Society with fome paper, which 
lhall have received the approbation of the Committee 
of Papers. 

III. That every Candidate for admiffion into the 
Society, whether as an Ordinary or Honorary Member, 
ihall be propofed by at leaft three Ordinary Members, 

who 



xii LAW S. 

who fhall fign a Certificate of his being, from their 
knowledge of him, or of his writings, a fit perfon to be 
admitted into it : which certificate 'fhall be read at fcur 
fucceffive meetings of the Society, previoufly to the elec- 
tion — Such election, with refpect to an Ordinary Mem- 
ber, to be void, if he do not attend within four meetings 
afterwards, unlefs he can plead fome reafonable apology. 

IV*. That every election fhall be conducted by ballot ; 
That the majority of votes fhall decide ; thirteen Mem- 
bers at leaft being prefent ; and that the Prcfident fhall 
have a cafting voice, if the number of votes be equal. 

V. That two Prefidcnts, four Vice-Prefidents, two 
Secretaries, a Treafurer, and a Librarian, be elected 
annually, by the majority of members prefent, on the 
laft Wednefday in the month of April : The election 
to be determined by ballot. 

VI. That a Committee of Papers fhall be appointed, 
by ballot, at the fame time, which fhall confift of the 
Prefidents, Vice-Prefidents, Secretaries, Treafurer and 
Librarian, together with fix other members of the 
Society : And that this Committee fhall decide, by 
ballot, concerning the infertion in the Regifter, or the 
publication, of any paper which fhall have been read 
before the Society ; and fhall be authorized to felccT-, 
with the con fen t of the author, detached parts of any 
paper, the whole of which may not be deemed proper 
either for infertion or publication : But that the prefence 
of feven members of the Committee fnall be necefiary 
for fuch difcuffion, or decifion. 

VII. That Vifitors may be introduced by any Mem- 
ber to the meetings of the Society, with the permiflion 
of the Chairman. 

VIII. That the fubjects of converfation comprehend 
Natural Philofophy, Theoretical and Experimental Che- 
miftry, Polite Literature, Civil Law, General Politics, 

Commerce, 



L A ' W S. xiii 

Commerce, and the Arts. But that Religion, the 
Praaical Branches of Phyfic, and Britifh Politics, be 
deemed prohibited ; and that the Chairman {hall deliver 
nib Veto, whenever they are introduced. 

IX- That each Member, wrro fhall favour the Society 
with any interefting fafts and obfervations, refpeding 
Philof. phy, Polite Literature, &e. which may occur to 
him, either from refledion, experiment, reading, or 
corr'efpondence, fhall fend his paper to one of the 
Secretaries, the Monday before the meeting of the 

Society. 

X. That the Secretary, to whom the paper (hall be 
delivered, (hall, with the approbation of one Prefident, 
or two Vice-Prefuients, have the power of fufpending 
the recital of it, if deemed improper to be read, until 
the pleafure of the Committee oi Papers be known, a 
n " ng f which fhall be called by the Secretary to 
inrpeft it : And, if the Committee difapprove of its 
bu:. -introduced to the Society, they (hall be empower- 

ed to r-ject it. 

XL That all papers which fhall be delivered to the 
Secretary, and not prohibited as above, {hall be read 
hy him, or the author, according to the order of fuc- 
ceffion in waich they were prefented. 

XH. Thu each paper fhall be read to the Society 
v/.ihout interruption j and that more than thirty minutes 
fhall not be allowed to the reading of any fingle paper: 
If more time be required in the delivery of it, the 
remainder fhall, except the Society determine otherwife, 
be deferred to the fucceeding evening. No paper, 
however, fhall engage more than two evenings, with- 
out the confent of the Society expreffed by a ballot. 

XIII. That a fecond paper fhall not be read, before 
the fubiea of the former one has been difculTed. 

J XIV. That 



XIV 



REGULATIONS. 



XIV. That the Society {hall meet every Wednefday 
evening, except during the Months of June, July, 
Auguft, and September: And that each meeting {hall 
commence at half paft fix, and be concluded at half 
paft eight o'clock. 

XV. That each Member {hall pay one guinea an- 
nually, at half yearly payments, into the hands of 
the Treafurer, to defray the rent of the room, and 
other incidental expences ; and alfo, to eftablifh a fund 
for the benefit of the Society. And if any Member 
fliall refufe or neglect to pay his fubfcription, he {hall 
be excluded the Society. Each Member, on his elec- 
tion, to pay his fubfcription for the current half year, 
together with one guinea, admiffion fee. 

XVI. That it be recommended to each Member to 
enter the Society's room with filence, and without 
ceremony. 

XVII. That no Laws fhall be enacted, refcinded, 
or altered, but at the quarterly meetings, on the laft 
Wednefdays in the Months of January, April, and 
October : And that notice {hall be given, at leaft four- 
teen days, previous to thofe meetings. 



REGULATIONS. 

I. THAT the Society fhall publifh a volume of 
mifcellancous papers, every two years. And that, at 
{rated times, the Committee fhall feledt from the 
papers, which fhall have been read to the Society, 
fuch as fhall appear to be moft worthy of publication : 
But that no papers fhall be publifhed, againft the con- 
fent of the authors, 

II. That 



REGULATIONS; xv 

II. That a Library be formed for the ufe of the Mem- 
bers of this Society ; and that the Librarian be autho- 
rized to purchafe fuch books, as fhall be ordered at the 
quarterly meetings of the Society : But that no books 
fhall be taken out of the Library, without a written 
order from one of the Secretaries, limiting the time of 
keeping it to feven days. 

III. That the resolution to eftablifh a Library be 
announced to the Honorary Members of the Society; 
and that it be intimated to them by the Secretaries, that 
donations of their paft and future publications will be 
highly acceptable. 

IV . That a gold medal, of the value of feven guineas, 
be given to the Author of the beft Experimental Paper 
on any fubjecl: relative to Arts and Manufactures, which 
fhall have been delivered to the Secretaries, and read at 
the ordinary meetings of the Society before the laft 
Wednefday in March 1786. 

V. That the adjudication of this premium be referred 
to the Committee of Papers; that their decifion fhall 
be made by ballot; and that the medal fhall be deliver- 
ed by the Prefident, to the perfon to whom it fhall have 
been adjudged, or to his reprefentative, at the firft meet- 
ing of the Society in October 1786. 

VI. That if the perfon, to whom the medal fhall 
have been adjudged, be not one of the Society, his name 
fhall be enrolled in the lift of Honorary Members. 

VIT. The regular attendance of members being effen- 
tial to the profperity and ufefulnefs of the Jnftitution, 
that if any Member fhall abfent himfelf during the fpace 
of three months, from the meetings of the Society, 
notice fhall be fent to him, at a quarterly meeting, that 
the Society confiders his abfence as a mark of difrefpecl, 

and 



xvi A LIST OF THE MEMBERS. 

and that a more punctual obfervance of the Laws is 
expected from him. 

V lit. To encourage the exertions of young men, 
who attend the meetings of the Society, as vifitors, that 
a filver medal, not exceeding the value of two guineas, 
be annually given to any one of them, under the age of 
twenty-one years, who fhall, within the year, have fur- 
nifhed the Society with the befl; paper on any fubje<fr. of 
Literature or Philofophy ; and that fuch adjudication 
fhall be made by the Committee of Papers, 



A LIST OF THE 



MEMBERS. 



.M. I 

,S. Hono- I 
or. Mem. | 



* James Mafley, Efq. -\ 

* Thomas Percival, M. D. F. R. S. & * Prefident?; 

S. A. & Reg. Soc. Med. Par. Soc. 3 

* The Rev. Samuel Hall, A.M. 

* Charles White, Efq. F.R.S 
rary Mem. R.M. S. & Cor 
R. S. A. in Scotland, &c. 

* George Lloyd, Efq. 

* Mr. George Bew, 

* The Rev. Thomas Barnes, D. D. 

* Mr. Thomas Henry, F. R. S. 
Mr. lfaac MoiTe, 
Mr. Thomas Robinfon, 
Mr- Jofeph Atkinfon, 
Mr, John Barrow, 



)"Vice-Prefident5. 



| Secretaries. 

Treafurer. 
Librarian. 



Thomas 



A LIST OF THE MEMBERS, xvii 

Thomas Butterworth Baylcy, Efq. F; R. S» 

* Mr. John Bill. 
Mr. John Birch. 

Mr. Charles Frederick Brandt* 
Mr. Afhworth Clegg. 
Mr. Robert Darbey. 
Mr. James Dinwiddie. 
Mr. John Drinkwater. 

* Mr. George Duckworth, 
Alexander Eafon, M. D. 
Mr. Edward Hall. 

Mr. Richard Hall. 

* The Rev. Ralph Harrifon. 
Mr. Samuel Hibbert. 

* Mr. Thomas Kerfliaw. 
Mr. John Lawrence. 
Mr. James Macaulay. 
Peter Mainwaring, M. D, 
John Mitchell, M. D. 
Mr. John Orme. 

Mr. George Philips. 
Mr. John Philips. 
Mr. Robert Philips; 

* Mr John Leigh Philips, 
Mr. Thomas Philips. 

* Mr. James Potter. 
Mr. John Powel. 

The Rev. Frederick Robert Slated 
Mr. George Wakefield. 
Mr. George Walker. 
Mr. John Wilfon. 

Tlofe msrkcd tlm * an of tit Committee of Vaftru 

t> HONORARY 



xviii A LIST OF THE MEMBERS. 



HONORARY MEMBERS. 



•¦- 



John Aikin, M. D. 

Felix Vicq d'Azyr, R. S. Med. Par. Sec. & R. A. Sc 

Soc. &c 
Sir George Baker, Bart. F. R. S. Medic. Regin. 
James Beattie, L L- D. 
Patrick Brydone, Efq. F. R. S. 
Mr. John Buchanan. 

The Right Rev. Beilby, Lord Bifhop.of Chefter. 
Edwood Chorley, M. D. 
Mr. Thomas Cooper. 
James Currie, M. D. 
Erafmus Darwin, M. D. F. R. S. 
Edward Huffey Delaval, Efq. F. R. S. Reg. S. S. Got- 

ting. & Upfal, & Inftit. Bologn. Soc. 
The Hon. Sir John Talbot Dillon, Knight and Baron 

of the Holy Roman Empire. 
Rev. William Enfield, LL. D. 
William Falconer, M.D. F. R. S. 
Anthony Fothergill,. M.D. F. R.S. 
Benjamin Franklin, L L. D. R. S. L. & R. Acad. 

Scicnt. Par. Soc. &c. 
The Rev. — — FrofTard, D. D. of Lyons, in France. 
William Hawes, M.D. 
John Haygarth, M. B. F. R. S. 
Mr. George Hibbert. 
Thomas Houlfton, M. D. 
Alexander Hinter, M. D.. F. R. S. 
James Johnftone, M. D. 
Monfieur Lavoifier, Reg. Ac, Scient. P. Soc. 

The 



A LIST OF THE MEMBERS, xix 

TheRight Rev. Richard, Lord Bilhopof Landaff, F.R.S. 

John Coakley Lettibm, M. D. F. R. S. & S. A. 

Mr. J. Hyacinth Magellan, F.R. S. & R. Acad, Petrop, 

. & Paris. Correfp. 
Mr. Patrick Mac Morland. 
Henry Moyes, M. D. 
The Rev. John Pope. 
The Rev. Jofeph Prieftley, LL..D. F.R.S. Acad. Imp. 

Petrop, R. Holm. & Med. & Reg. Acad. Scient. 

P. Soc. 
Mr. William Rathbone. 
Mr. William Rofcoe, Liverpool. 
Benjamin Rufh, M. D. Profeflbr of Chemiftry at 

Philadelphia. 
Doming Ra(botham, Efq. 
Samuel Foart Simmons, M. D. F. R. S. & R. S. M. P. 

Soc. & R. S. Monfpel. Correfp. 
The Rev. William Turner. 
The Rev. George Travis, A. M. 
Mr. Alexander Volta, Profeflbr of Experimental Philo- 

fophy at Como, &c. 
Martin Wall, M. D. Clinical Profeflbr in the 

Univerfity of Oxford. 
Mr. John Warltire. 
The Rev. Gilbert Wakefield, B. D. 
Jofiah Wedgwood, Efq. F. R. S. 
The Rev. John Whittaker, B. D.'F. S. A. 



b 2 CONTENTS 



CONTENT 



O F T H t 



FIRST VOLUME, 



COME Remarks on the Opinion that the 
Animal Body poffejfes the Power of genera- 
ting Cold. By George Bell, M.D. Page i. 

On the Advantages of Literature and Philoso- 
phy in general and especially on the Consistency 
of Literary and Philosophical, with Com- 
mercial, Pursuits. , By Thomas Henrv, 
F.R.S. - - P. 7. 

On Crystallization. By Alexander Eason, 
M. D. - P. 29. 

On the Preservation of SeaW atb.r from Putre- 
faction i>y AfetfKj 0/" Quicklime. i?y Thomas 
Henry, F.R.S. — To which is added, an Ac- 
count of a newly invented Machine for impreg- 
nating Water, or other Fluids with Fixed 
Air, &c. Communicated to Mr. Henry by 
J. Hay-jarth, M. B. F.R. S. - P. 41. 

On 



CONTENTS. xxi 

On the Nature and EJfential Characters of 
Poetry, as dijlingmjhed from Prose. By 
Thomas Barnes, D. D. - Page 5 4- 

On the Affinity Jubfijling between the Arts : with 
a Plan for promoting and extending Manufac- 
tures, by encouraging thofe Arts on which Ma- 
nufactures principally depend. By Thomas 
Barnes, D. D. - " P - 7 2 ' 

Remarks on the diferent Success with Refpe£i to 
Health, offome Attempts to pafs the Winter. 
in high northern Latitudes. By John 
Aikin, M.D. - - P- 8 9- 

On the Pleasure which the Mind receives 
from the Exercise of its Faculties; and 
that of Thirt in particular. By Charles de 
Polier, Efq. - - P- II0 ' 

On CEconomical Registers. By Mr. J. Wimpey. 

P. 134. 

On the Pleasure which the Mind, in many Cafes, 
receives, from contemplating Scenes of Di stress. 
By Thomas Barnes, D.D. - P. 144. 

Observations on BlJndness, and on the Employ- 
ment of the other Senses to fupply the Loss of 
Sight. By Mr. George Bew. - P. 159. 

0«Salt-petre. By James Massey, 2%. P. 184. 

M Attempt to floew, that a Taste for the 
Beauties of Nature and the Fine Arts, has 
no Influence favourable to Morals. By the 
Rev. Samuel Hall, A. M. - P. 223. 

Observa- 



xxii CONTENTS, 

Observations on the Ufe of Acids in Bleaching 
of Linen. By Alexander Eason, M D. 

Page 240. 

Conjectural Remarks on the Symbols or Charac- 
ters, employed by Astronomers to represent the 

feveral Planets, and by Chemists, to exprefs 
the fever al Metals: in a Letter to Thomas 
Percival, M. D. &V. By Martin Wall, 
M. D. Clinical Professor in the Univer- 

fity of Oxford. - P. 243. 

Remarks on the Knowledge of the Ancients. 
By William Falconer, M. D. F. R. S. Com- 
municated by Dr. Percival. - - P. 261. 

An Inquiry concerning the Influence of the 
Scenery of a Country on the Manners of its 
Inhabitants. By William Falconer, M. D. 
F.R.S. - - - P. 271. 

A Tribute to the Memory of Charles de 
Polier, Efq. By Thomas Percival, M. D. 

tfc. - - '- - -P. 287. 

Thoughts on the Style and Taste of Garden- 
ing among the Ancients. By William Fal- 
coner, M.D. F.R.S. - - P. 297. 

On the Regeneration 0/. Animal Substances. 
By Charles White ? Efq. F. R. S. fcfr. P. 325. 

On the Diversions of Hunting, Shooting, 
Fishing, &f. confidered as compatible -pith 

Humanity. - j r P> 34 1 * 

Observa- 



CONTENTS. xxii. 

Observations on Longevity. By Anthony 

FOTHERGILL, M. D. F. R. S. - P. 355. 

On the Influence of the Imagination and the 
Passions upon the Understanding. By 
Thomas Barnes, D. D. - P. 375. 

On the Ascent of Vapour. By Alexander 

• Eason, M. D. - - p. 395. 

On the Comparative Merit of the Ancients 
and the Moderns with Refpeclto the Imitative 
Arts. By Mr. Thomas Kershaw. P. 405. 

On the Impropriety of allowing a Bounty to en- 
courage the Exportation of Corn, &c. By 
Mr. Joseph Wimpey. P. 413; 

On the Natural History of the Cow, fo far as 
it relates to its giving Milk ; particularly J or the 
Use of Man. By Charles White, Efq. 
F.R.S. fcfr. - - - p. 442. 

On the Natural History and Origin of Mag- 
n esi an Earth, particularly as conmcled with 
thofe of Sea Salt, and o/Nitre ; with Obser- 
vations onfome of the Chemical Properties 
of that Earth, which have been, hitherto, either 
unknown, or undetermined. By Thomas Henry, 
F.R.S. - - P. 448.' 



EXPLANA- 



EXPLANATION of the PLATES 
in Vol. I. 

PLATE I. 

Machine for impregnating Liquors with Fixed 
Air. 

E The Effervefcing -Veffel. 
Tt The Tubes through which the Air is 
conveyed. 

A The Air-Veffel. 

O The Opening through which the Com- 
mon Air is expelled. 

B The Bellows. 

W The Water- Veffel. 

PpThe Pipe through which the Air is 
drawn into the Bellows. 

c c A Pipe forming the communication be- 
tween the Air and Water-VefTels. 

PLATE II. 

Symbols ufed by the Aftronomers and Chemifts. 

PLATE III. 

A Reprefentation of the Stump of the 
Humerus mentioned in page 337. 

The dotted Line (hews the Part where the 
Arm was amputated. 

MEMOIRS 




Plil 



MEMOIRS 



OF THE 



LITERARY AND PHILOSOPHICAL 
SOCIETY OF MANCHESTER. 



Some Remarks on the Opinion that the Animal 
Body pojejfes the Power of generating Cold. 
By George Bell, M. D. Read May 16, 178 1* 



A CURIOUS and important difcovery 
was announced to the world in the 
lxv. vol. of the Philofophical Trans- 
actions. We are there informed, that Dr. For- 
dyce and other gentlemen, feveral different times, 
went into a room, the air of which was heated 
to a degree far above that of the human blood; 
and though they remained there, fometimes 
for the fpace of half an hour, yet the heat of their 
bodies was not increafed by more than 3 or 4 de- 
grees. From hence they concluded, that the 
living body poflefles a peculiar power of generat- 
Vol. I. B ing 



1 "Dr. Bell on the Generation of 

ing cold by fome occult operation. The expe- 
riments feem to have been made with fufficient 
accuracy ; but the conclufion drawn from them 
is liable to ftrong objection. For, in forming it, 
feveral circumftances have been overlooked, 
which, in my opinion, afford an eafy explanation 
of all the phenomena, on principles already 
known, without referring them to a new law of 
the animal body, which probably does not exift. 
Thefe circumftances I ihall endeavour to point 
out. 

I. The firffc caufe which prevented their bodies 
from receiving a greater increafe of heat was, 
The rarefaclion of the air with which they were fur- 
rounded. 

The quantity of heat which different fubftances 
contain, is, in general, in proportion to their 
denfity ; and, in this proportion, they communi- 
cate more or lefs of it to others. A cubical foot 
of water, contains a much greater quantity of 
heat, than a cubical foot of air, of the fame 
temperature: and, if a third fubftance be added, 
its temperature ivill be confiderably changed by 
the hot water, while by the hot air it will hardly 
be changed in any perceptible degree. Many 
facts may be adduced, which fcrve to illuiTrate, 
and, at the fame time, are explained by this 
caufe. Thus, the fteam of boiling water will 
fcald a perfon's hand, which can fupport the heat 
of air, of the fame temperature. And thus per- 
haps 



Cold in Animal Bodies. 3 

haps the weather, when hazy and loaded with 
vapour, feems to our feeling, hotter than when 
pure and rare ; although by the thermometer ic 
is found to be equally warm in both inftances. 

This alfo was the true reaf in why, in making 
thofe experiments, Dr. Fordyce always found that 
he could bear a greater degree of heat in dry, 
than in moid air. But nothing {hews more 
clearly the flownefs with which heat is imparted 
to a denfer fubflance, from one that is highly 
rarefied, than a circumftance mentioned in the 
paper in queftion : " that even the fmall quan- 
tity of mercury, contained in a thermometer 
which the gentlemen carried with them into the 
room, did not arrive at the degree to which the 
air was heated, during the whole time they re- 
mained there." 

II. Another caufe which, in the given fituation, 
would diminilh the effect of the heated air, is, 
The evaporation made from the fur face of the body. 

That evaporation produces a confiderable ab- 
forption of heat is well known : and, in making 
the experiments, there is reafon to believe, that it 
took place in a confiderable degree. Dr. Fordyce, 
anxious perhaps to eftabiifh his general law, 
feems unwilling to allow its influence. But when 
it is conficlered, that by the operation of the heat, 
the force of the circulation was increafed, the 
pores of the fkin relaxed, and the prtflure of the 
internal air diminilhed ; when we are told, that 

B 2 a turgef- 



a Dr. Bell on the Generation of 

a turgefcence of the veins, and an univerfal red- 
riefs of the furface of the body, took place ; we 
are compelled to refufe credit to the afTertion, 
even of Dr. Fordyce, that there was no evapora- 
tion. The evaporation rault have been great, and 
would diminifh the effect of the external heat by 
furrounding the furface with a cool atmofphere, 
from its temperature fit for the abforption of heat, 
and from its rarity, unfit for the ready tranfmif- 
fion of it into the body. 

III. But another very powerful caufe of the 
body's having preferved its temperature in the 
given fituation, remains to be noticed ; which is, 
<£he fucceffive afflux of blood to the furface, of a tem- 
perature inferior to that of the furrounding air. — By 
this means, the fmall quantity of heat which 
penetrated the fkin would be immediately carried 
off, and transferred throughout the body: and in 
would have required the fpace of many hours, 
before the whole mafs could have received any 
confiderable increafe of heat *. 

It has been adduced, in proof of the exiftence 
of the power of the living body to generate cold, 
that frogs, lizards, and other animals of the fame 

• It may here be remarked, that the two Iaft mentioned 
caufes a& more powerfully in moderating the heat of the 
external air, according to the necefiity there is for their 
a&ion : for both the evaporation from the furface, and the 
velocity of the circulation of the blood, are in proportion 
to the degree of heat applied. 

fort 



Cold in Animal Bodies. 5 

fort polfefs it ; for if touched, they feel cold. 
This proves only, that their heat is lefs than that 
of the hand, with which they are felt ; and per- 
haps lefs than that of the air, when the trial is 
made. 

But it is extremely probable, that no animal 
¦whatever can live in health, for any considerable 
time, in an atmofphere of a temperature fuperior 
in heat to that of its own blood. Thus we find, 
that the animals in queftion hide themfelves in 
the day-time among thick grafs, where there is 
a great evaporation ; and in places, into which 
the rays of the fun cannot penetrate. Worms, in 
hot weather, during the day, lie deep in the 
ground ; but in the night-time, when it is cool, 
rife to the furface to refrefli themfelves in the dew. 
When frogs, worms, and fuch other animals are 
expofed to air warmer than their blood, its influ- 
ence is counteracted by the fame caufes which 
counteract its influence on the human body, the 
evaporation from the furface of their bodies, and 
the coldnefs of their blood. Such accidental 
expofure happens more frequently to them, than 
to the human fpecies ; and, from the inferiority 
of their fize, they would be fooner heated through, 
and lefs able to refift the noxious effects of the 
hot air, were not their power of refitting it made 
up in another refpedt. In fuch fituations, the 
evaporation from the furface of their bodies is 
greater i for their fkin is more JaXj, and is always 

B 3 covered 



6 " Dr. Bell on the Generation of, &c. 

covered with moifture. It is, perhaps, for this 
purpofe alfo, that it is rough and uneven ; which, 
by extending the furface, caufes a greater evapo- 
ration. 

Thefe may be faid to be the means through 
which the human body is preferved, in nearly the 
fame temperature, when it happens to be placed, 
for a time, in an atmofphere of a fuperior degree 
of heat. They feem to me fo adequate to this 
effect, that I would even venture to impute the 
increafe of the temperature of the body, from 
96 to 100 degrees, which happened in the expe- 
riments, rather 'to the acceleration of the blood, 
than to the influx of heat from the external air. 
While the caufe of animal heat remains unknown, 
it would be prefumption to aflfert, that thefe are 
the only means, by which the body is enabled 
to refill the effects of external heat. There may 
be others ; and it is not unreafonable to fuppofc, 
that as external cold, perhaps by its tonic influ- 
ence, increafes the power of the body to generate 
heat, fo external heat may diminifh that power, 
and thus leflTen the quantity of heat generated 
within, while the evaporation, produced by the 
fame caufe, guards it againft receiving any accef- 
fion from without. 



On 



Mr. Henry on the Conjiftency of Literature, &c, 7 

On the Advantages of Literature and Philoso- 
phy in general, and efpecially on the confiftency of 
Literary and Philosophical with Commer- 
cial Pursuits. By Thomas Henry, F. R. S. 

Read 051 ober 3, 1781. 

To either India fee the merchant fly, 
Scar'd at the fpeftre of pale poverty ! — ¦ 
See him with pains of body, pangs of foul, 
Burn thro' the tropic, freeze beneath the pore! 
Wilt thou do nothing for a noble end, 
Nothing to make philofcphy thy friend ? 

Pope's Imitations of Horace, Epift. I. Book l< 

THE purfuit of knowledge, when properly 
directed, and under due influence, is of 
the greated importance to mankind. In propor- 
tion as a nation acquires iuperior degrees of it, 
her (rate of civilization advances, and fhe becomes 
diftingui (lied from her lefs enlightened neigh- 
bours by a greater refinement in the manners of 
her inhabitants, and a departure from thofe fero- 
cious vices, which mark the features of favage 
countries. Vices Ihe will, indeed, ftill be addict- 
ed to, but of a different complexion from thofe 
of her more uncultivateddays. For, wherever a love 
of learning and the arts makes any considerable 
progrefs, even crimes themfelves lofe fomething 
of their atrocioufnefs, and, though ftill offenfive, 
are diverted of thofe ftrong, marks of brutality, 
which generally accompany ignorance. The 

J5 4 horrors, 



8 Mr, Henry on the Conftjlency of 

horrors of war itfelf are fofcened : an enemy is 
treated with humanity and kindnefs : the milder 
virtues find admittance amongft the clafh of 
arms; and men, when compelled to hoftilities* 
feek victory, not to en/lave or deftroy, but in the 
moment of triumph rejoice in opportunities to 
evince their clemency and generofity to the van- 
quished foe. 

That this picture is not too ftrongly coloured 
will appear from an appeal to hiftory. In the 
earlier ages, we fee a conquering army hurling 
deftrudtion and defolation, murder and rapine 
around them, and, with unrelenting fury, fcarcely 
diftinguifhing between friends and enemies. In 
thefe more polifhed times, and the polifh may be 
fairly attributed to the diffufion of learning and 
philofophy, fuch cruel exceffes are difcounte- 
nanced and prohibited by the general confent of 
every civilized people. 

Nor are thefe improvements confined to 
national manners : thofe of individuals have 
been equally benefited. The natural tendency 
of a cultivation of polite learning, is, to refine the 
understanding, humanize the foul, enlarge the 
field of ufeful knowledge, and facilitate the at- 
tainment of the comforts and accommodations 

of life. 

How great is the contrail between the characters 
of the elegant fcholar, and the man whofe uncul- 
tivated mind feels no reftraint, but thofe which 

the 



Literature, &c. with Commerce. 9 

the laws of his country impofe ! A tafte for po- 
lite literature, and the works of nature and of art, 
is efientially neceflary to form the Gentleman, 
and will always diftinguifh him more completely 
from the vulgar, than any advantage he can de- 
rive from wealth, drefs, or titles. Thefe external 
decorations, without thofe refined manners which 
proceed from a proper ftudy of books and men, 
ferve only to render his ignorance more confpi- 
cuous ; whereas a man of a polite imagination, 
not only fecures himfelf a favourable reception 
in the world, but as Mr. Addifon obferves, " is 
let into a great many pleafures that the vulgar 
are not capable of receiving. He can converfe 
with a picture, and find a companion in a ftatue. 
He meets with a fweet refrefhment in a defcrip- 
tion, and often feels a greater fatisfaction in the 
profpect of fields and meadows, than another does 
in the pofTcfiion. It gives him a kind of pro- 
perty indeed in every thing he fees, and makes 
the moft rude and uncultivated parts of nature 
adminifter to his pleafures."* 

Affluent circumftances and abundant leifure 
give the Gentleman great advantages over his 
inferiors, in the more refined ftudies. The cold 
and heavy hand of poverty chills and reprefTes 
the efforts of genius j wealth cherifhes, and, if 
I may be allowed the metaphor, manures and 

* Spedlator, No. 411. 

pufhes 



io Mr. Henry on the Confifiency of 

pufhes it forward to maturity. Sometimes, in- 
deed, in To rich a foil, weeds will fpring, which, 
if not timely rooted up, may endanger the fafety 
and health of the nobler plant. But a careful 
cultivator will exterminate them early, and fedu- 
loufly prevent their deleterious effects. 

The importance of the Gentleman will rtill rife 
higher, his mind be enlarged, and his pleafures 
be increafed, if, to the accomplishments of the 
polite fcholar, he add the knowledge of the phi, 
iofopher, and endeavour with a noble ambition, 

Thro' vafi immenfity to pierce ; 
See worlds on worlds compofe one univerfe ; 
Obferve how fyftem into fyftem runs, 
How other planets circle other funs. * 

Defending from this ftupendous elevation, 
lie will find this globe, which we inhabit, an 
ample field for phyfical enquiries. Befides, that 
man himfelf is the proper ftudy of mankind, he 
will find the whole univerfe replete with fubjecls 
for his contemplation. The air, the ocean, the 
vegetable and animal creation, the furface of 
the earth, and her mod profound cavities to 
which human induftry has reached, will all Am- 
ply abundant food for his intellectual powers, 
furmfli him with infinite fources of amufement, 
fhew to his wondering eye 

All matter quick and burfting into birth, f 
* Pope's E% on Man, Ep. I. + Ioid- 

and 






Literature', &c. -with Commerce. n 

and teach him to admire that wife, that omnif- 
cient Being, whofe fuperintending providence 
infpecls and regulates the whole, even the mod 
minute parts of his creation, 

And fees with equal eye, as God of all, 
A hero perifh, or a fparrow fall.* 

I believe, few will controvert the advantages I 
have pointed out, as arifing to the Gentleman and 
profeffionalift, from the ftudy of the Belles Lettres 
and philofophy s but I am lorry to fay, many 
are the adverfaries we have to encounter, if thefe 
arguments be extended to another wealthy clafs 
of men — the Merchant and Manufacturer. The 
commercial man, fay they, mould confine his 
knowledge to trade. His compting-houfe (hould 
be his ftudy; his ledger his hourly amufement. 
Gold and filver are the only metals with which he 
ought to be acquainted ; and of thefe to know no 
more, than the different coins into which they 
are formed, and the current price of bullion. For 
poetry, painring and mufic, he muft have no at- 
tachment, no tafte for engravings, but thofe of 
bank bills, and, if a fingle philofophical idea 
(hould enter his head, thefe inveighers againft 
knowledge would expect to fee his name imme- 
diately in the lift of bankrupts. 

* Pope's Eflay on Man, Ep. I. 

To 



1 2 Mr. Henry on the Conjijtency of 

To be ferious — So far have thefe prejudices 
extended, that many parents entertain the moft 
difmal apprehenfions of their fons acquiring a tafte 
for literature, and look on an inclination to natural 
philofophy as highly dangerous to their progrefs 
in trade. Behold, fay they, that wealthy manu- 
facturer! Without any knowledge, beyond that of 
the goodnefs of his raw materials, and of judging 
whether his wares were properly fabricated and 
flnifhed, joined with a tolerable acquaintance with 
figures, and a moft cautious prudence, he has 
amafTed an affluent fortune. On the other hand, 
fee that man of erudition! Inftead of attending to 
the manufacture of his goods, his time was em- 
ployed'in reading hiftory j inftead of keeping his 
books, and ftating his accounts, he was folving 
problems in Euclid, or making chemical experi- 
ments in order to effect new difcoveries, when he 
might have availed himfelf of thofe already made, 
by the labour and at the expence of others. His 
refined ideas had taught him that fufpicion is mean, 
and his learning and credulity have plunged him 
into ruin. 

Thefe are fpecious but deceitful reprefentations. 
That an imprudent young man may, by devoting 
thofe hours to philofophical or literary purfuits, 
which ought to have been given to bufinefs, have 
precipitated himfelf into poverty and diftrefs, can- 
not be denied. But the mifchief arifes, not from 
a tafte for thofe ftudies, but from the improper 

arrange- 



Literature. &c, with Commerce. 11 

arrangement of time. Want of ceconomy in this 
point is equally, if not more injurious, than in 
pecuniary matters. 

Ic will be alfo allowed, that the profefiion, in 
which each individual is engaged, mould, next 
to the more important interefts of religion, at- 
tract and employ his principal attention. But the 
mind of man, and efpecially of young men, muft 
be provided with amufements. The young tradef- 
man of fortune has generally many hours of lei- 
fure, and if amufements be neceffary to footh the 
rugged paths of bufinefs, (hall we choofe thofe 
which lead to diffipation, to extravagance, to vice, 
or fuch as tend to civilize the mind and improve 
the underftanding, by developing the operations 
of nature, explaining the nice connection which 
fubfifts between the loweft and higher order of 
beings, 

To man's imperial race, 
From the green myriads in the peopled grafs ; 

and tracing the hand of Omnipotence through 
every link of that 

Vaft chain of being, which from God began, 
Nature's etherial, human, angel, man, 
Bead, bird, fifli, infefl, what no eye can fee, 
No glafs can reach. * 

Will not the time he can fpare from bufinefs be 
more ufcfully employed in the ftudy of hiftory, 

* Pope's Eflay on Man, Ep. I. 

and 



f 4 Mr. Henry on the Conftjtency of 

and the reading of our beft authors; or at an all* 
pump, an electrical machine, or a microfcope, 
than, as is too often the cafe with thofe youths 
who have not received that culture which their 
fortunes entitled them to, at the tavern, the gam- 
ing table, or the brothel ; or, if their minds be 
not fufficiently adivc, and paflions ftrong, to im- 
pel them to thefe exceffes, in idlenefs, low com- 
pany, and mean and degrading purfuits ? " There 
are indeed, but very few," fays an excellent ob- 
ferver of human nature, " who know how to be 
idle and innocent, or have a reiifh of any plea- 
fures that are not criminal -, every diverfion they 
take is at the expence of fome one virtue or ano- 
ther, and their very firft ftep out of bufinefs is 
into vice or folly. A man mould endeavour, there- 
fore, to make the fphere of his innocent pleafures 
as wide as pofllble, that he may retire into them 
with fafety, and find in them fuch a fatisfaction, 
as a wife man would not blufh to take." 

The arguments, which have hitherto been ad- 
duced in favour of commercial men endeavour- 
ing to attain liberal knowledge, have been prin- 
cipally confined to thofe, whofe parents have 
already acquired fuch fortunes, as raife their fons 
above the level of the more neceflitous tradefman, 
in whom a greater degree of afiiduity in bufinefs 
is necefifary. But, even in this cafe, if his dili- 
gence and application degenerate into an in- 
ordinate defie of accumulating wealth, and this 

ruling 



Literature, &c. Kith Commerce. 15 

ruling pqjjion be allowed to conquer reafon, to fup- 
prefs every wifh of the mind for improving and 
fitting itfelf for higher enjoyments in this life, 
and the participation of ftill more exalted plea- 
fures in a future flate, it then becomes criminal, 
and ought to be refifted. 

But it may be faid, that all men are not in- 
tended by nature for fcholars or philosophers $ 
and that there are ftations in life that will not 
admit of profound ftudy and inveftigation. Yet 
there are few, whofe minds may not receive a. bias 
to fome ufeful refearch, whereby they may be 
pleafingly and ufefully employed. And we may 
be bold to affert, that, though it is not in the 
power of every man to mine as a diftinguifhed 
literary character, yet there is fcarcely any one 
fo meanly fituated, as to render fome fhare of 
learning inconvenient f.o.him; or who will be 
a worfe man, or a worfe member of fociety, by 
having advanced a few fteps higher \a the fcale 
of human knowledge. 

Nemo adeo feras eft, at non mitefcere poffit, 
Si modo culture patiente'm commodat aurem. * 

It is one. thing to be a profejfed fcholar or phi- 
lofopher, and another, to poffefs fuch a degree of 
information on a Subject," as is compatible with 
our other avocations. To be a complete aftro- 

* Horatii, Epift. I. Lib.. 1. 

nomer 



1 6 Mr. Henry on the Confijlency of 

nomer would almoft monopolife the bufmefs of 
a man's life. To procure a general, but fatisfac- 
tory idea of the motions of the planetary fyftem ; 
of the diftance of the fun from the earth, and of 
the yet more immenfe diftance between us and 
the fixed ftars, &c. only a moderate degree of 
application is requifite. 

Among thofe objects of ftudy which may be 
recommended to the attention of the young 
tradefman, fome may be confidered as ornamen- 
tal, while others deferve to be claffed in a higher 
rank, with refpecl: to the utility he may expect 
to receive from the cultivation of them; and of 
thefe again, fome may be more particularly 
adapted to fome branches of trade than others. 

A knowledge of hiftory is an indifpenfible ac- 
compliihment to the opulent tradefman. Hiftory 
has been elegantly and emphatically defcribed 
by a poet, who is an honour to the age and 
country in which he writes ; 

Nature's clear mirror ! life's inftru&ive guide ! 
Her wifdom four'd by no preceptive pride ! 
Age from her leffon forms its wifeft aim, 
And youthful emulation fprings to fame. * 

That of our own country, in particular, mould 
attract the regard of the commercial ftudent. Few 
hiftories afford more interefting matter than that 
of this ifland. How muft the heart of a Briton 

• Hayley's EiTay on Hiftory. 

burn 



Liter ature y l£c. with Commerce. 17 

burn within him, when he reads of the glorious 
ftruggles which our anceftors, through many ages, 
have made to fecure to us that liberty we now fo 
amply enjoy! How clofely fhould he grafp that 
ineftimable jewel which has been purchafed by 
the blood of fo many heroes ! How muft he glory- 
in that conftitution which renders Great Britain 
the object of univerfal envy and admiration ! 

Nor are the objects of hiflory confined to the 
atchievementsof war, the revolutions of govern- 
ments, and the intrigues of ftatefmen. The origin 
and progreis of commerce and of arts, come alio 
within her province. And the philofophical 
hiftorian does not content himfelf with the mere 
relation of facts ; he endeavours to trace effects 
to their caufes, to fhew the principles by which 
commerce fhould be attuated ; how the various 
interefts, fituations and connections of different 
countries fhould lead to different kinds of traf- 
fic ; and in what manufactures the particular 
genius of a people may fit them to excel. Such 
difquifitions as thefe have lately tended to the 
eftablifhment of a new fyftem which may be, not 
improperly, denominated commercial philofo- 
phy. Here the tradefman is more immediately 
concerned. Thefe are fubjects which come di- 
rectly within the fphere of his inquiries. 

The Englifh ClafTics will be a rich fund of 
entertainment and improvement. Shakef^eare, 
Milton, Pope, Addifon, Thomfon, Gray, Mafon, 

Vol. I. C with 



1 8 Mr. Henry on the Confifiency of 

with a long lift of excellent writers in profe and 
verfe, will yield him charming refrefhments, after 
the fatigues of the day. He may even indulge 
himfelf in fweet converfe with the fair fex. A 
Montague, a Carter, a Barbauld and a Seward, 
iuflly demand his notice, and will prove mod 
dejightful companions, refine his tafte, polifh his 
manners, and meliorate his morals. 

The fciences of Natural Hiftory and Botany 
require (o much time to be devoted to the ftudy 
of them, and fuch minute investigation, that, 
however pleafing, they may be juftly confidered 
as improper objects for the man of bufinefs to 
purfue Jcientijically t fo as to enter into the exact 
arrangement and claffification of the different 
bodies of the animal, vegetable, and mineral 
kingdoms. But reading, and perfonal obferva- 
tion, will fupply him with ample matter for re- 
flection and admiration. He will fee the great 
univerfal caufe actuating every part of nature. 
He will fee animals, which a lefs accurate ob- 
ferver beholds with the mod contemptuous eye, 
executing works far above human abilities to per- 
form. He will behold them acting, and conduct- 
ing their affairs, with a prudence and forefighr, 
which, whether it be the effect of reafon or of 
inftinct, may juftly humble the pride of human 
wit. With what attention has Providence be- 
llowed on 1 the various clafies of animals, thofe 
endowments which are particularly adapted to 

their 



Literature, &c. with Commerce. 19 

their refpective functions ! Perhaps man, that 
lord of the creation, as he vainly boafts himfelf, is 
indebted for many ufeful leflbns to very inferior 
animals. The voice of Nature is thus defcribed 
as crying out to him, 

Go from the creatures thy inftru&ion take; 
Learn fiom the birds what food the thickets yield; 
Learn from the beafts the phyiic of the field ; 
The arts of building from the bee receive; 
Learn of the mole to plow, the worm to weave ; 
Learn of the little nautilus to fail, 
Spread the thin oar, and catch the driving gale. 

But feveral branches of Natural Philofophy 
feem peculiarly adapted to fill up the vacant 
hours in which the tradefman can withdraw from 
his employments. A general knowledge of all 
will tend to open and enlarge his underftanding, 
at the fame time that it affords him the mod 
rational amufement. While the ftudy of fome, 
in particular, may not only tend to effect thefe 
defirable purpofes, but fupply him with a kind of 
information which may turn to good account, 
by furnifhing him with the means of extending 
his commercial concerns, and conducting them 
to greater advantage; of improving thofe manu- 
factures in which he is already engaged, or 
inventing new fabrics, which may give addi- 
tional life and fpirit to trade. 

As Pneumatics, or the doctrine of the nature 
and properties of air, difplay an ample field of 
inveftigation to the philofopher, fo will they alio 

C 2 fupply, 



CO Mr. Henry on the Confijlency of 

fupply> to the more fuperficial inquirer, much 
inftruction and entertainment. Every man is 
interested in the properties of a fluid to which he 
is fo intimately related, and without which, he 
cannot fubfift a moment. Its various degrees of 
gravity, elafticity, heat, moifture, and purity, 
all affect the human race. Many of the molt 
dire difeafes which afflict mankind, are occafioned 
by noxious impregnations of the atmofphere, or 
cured by more favourable ftates of it. And 
many of the operations of nature and art are 
efTentially influenced by the changes which are 
Continually occurring in it. 

Philofophy has lately made moft rapid ad- 
vances in difcovering the constitution of com- 
mon air. The ingenious Dr. Prieftley has even 
taught us the art of fabricating it artificially, of 
producing it in a degree of purity far exceeding 
that of the moft falubrious climate, and of re- 
ducing it to the Mate in which we commonly breathe 
it when debafed by exhalations from the various 
bodies which it furrounds. From him we have 
alfo learned a mode of judging of the different 
degrees of purity in air, by means of the 
eudiometer, as of its gravity and heat by the 
barometer and thermometer. This excellent 
philofopher, to whom, as a learned foreigner 
has obferved, " Nature takes delight in revealing 
her fecrets," has alfo firft difcovered, and Dr. 
Ingenhoufe, treading in his paths, has more 

completely 



Literature, &c, with Commerce. 21 

completely demonftrated the method by which 
Nature makes ufe of the leaves of vegetables to 
purify the atmofphere, when contaminated with 
putrid or phlogiftic vapours. When in this Mate, 
every leaf ads as a ftrainer to the air, imbibing 
and applying to the nurture of the plant, fuch 
parts as are unfit for animal refpiration, and 
throwing it out, thus filtered and fuited to act 
again as a menftruum for the phlogifton, which 
is continually evolving by the breathing of ani- 
mals, the corruption of vegetables, and by the 
many various procefTes which are by nature and 
by art continually carrying on. 

Electricity is another branch of fcience which 
has afforded great light to the operations of 
nature. A knowledge of its leading principles, 
and a dexterity in making a number of entertain- 
ing experiments, may be attained by moderate 
application, and thereby, a field of amufement 
opened to the mind, at an eafy expence of time 
and money. 

To obtain a perfect acquaintance with the 
fcience of Optics, much attention and clofe ap- 
plication would be requifite. Such a knowledge 
of it, however, as is fufficient for general pur- 
pofes, is eafily arrived at. The nature of the 
refle&ion and refraction of the rays of light, of 
vifion, and of colours, the properties of lenfes, 
are ufeful and entertaining objects of inquiry. But 
the vtry minute divifibility of the rays of li^ht 

C 3 fills 



2 2 Mr. Henry on the Ccnfijlency of 

fills the mind with aftonifhment. When we 
are informed, that there proceeds more than 
6,000,000,000,000 times as many particles of 
light from a candle, in a fecond of time, as the 
whole earth contains grains of fand, fuppofmg 
each cubic inch of it to contain 1 ,000,000 j when 
we are told that light in its pafTage from the fun 
to the earth, moves with the immenfe velocity of 
95,173,000 miles in feven minutes and a half, we 
are impreffed with the mod profound veneration 
for that Almighty Being, who has fo wifely ad- 
jufted the proportions between the bulk and 
velocity of thefe rays, as to make them anfwer all 
his benevolent intentions to mankind ; whereas, 
an increafe or decreafe in the one or the other, 
might have been fatal to the animal and vegeta- 
ble world. 

By the Telefcope and Microfcope our eye is 
enabled to reach far beyond the limits of our 
natural virion. By the former, objecls, at con- 
fiderable diftances, are brought, as it were, within 
our grafp, and we can foar upwards into other 
worlds. By the latter, we are impowered to 
fearch into the minutiae of nature, to admire the 
delicacy of her operations, and the wonders of 
creation, exhibited in the perfect fabrics of the 
fmalleil animals and plants. 

The acquitition of knowledge in the fciences 
which we have already recommended, may per- 
haps be confidered rather as amufing and orna- 

mentalj 



Literature, &c. with Commerce. 23 

mental, than neceiTary. But there are other 
branches of natural philofophy which may be 
deemed highly ufeful and important to commer- 
cial men. Thefe are Geography, Mechanics, and 
Chemiftry. 

Geography is To clofely connected with com- 
merce, that it would be almoft as great a reflec- 
tion on the merchant to be ignorant of it, as of 
the rules of Arithmetic. Shall the man, whofe 
vefTels traverfe every quarter of the globe, be 
unacquainted with its form, its motion, its di- 
vifions, its kingdoms, feas, rivers, lakes, iflands 
and mountains ? Shall he be uninformed of the 
natipns and people with whom he traffics, their 
perfons, manners, cuftoms, governments and 
religion ? Are not the flux and reflux of the tides, 
the fituation and courfe of currents in particular 
feas, and the direction of thofe winds, which 
prevail in certain feafons and latitudes, pheno- 
mena, into the nature and caufes of which he is 
interefted to inquire ? And, above all, fhould 
he not endeavour to know the produce of every 
country, and the articles, which, not being fup- 
plied in their own climate, may be moft accept- 
able objects of commerce to the inhabitants? 

The remaining branches come more immedi- 
ately within the province of the manufacturer. 
Manufactures bear fo intimate a relation to the 
Mechanical Powers, as to be incapable of fub- 
iifting, in any degree of vigour, without their 

C 4 fupport. 



24 Mr Henry on the Conjiftency of 

fupport. How tedious, how expenfive, and how 
imperfect wouid many operations be found, if 
performed by the mere efforts of human ftrength, 
or manual fkill, unafMed by mechanical aid ! 
The mechanic powers facilitate their perform- 
ance, and render their produces more complete. 
How much do we owe to them for the improve- 
ment and extenfion of the manufactures of this 
town ! I am addreffing a fociety, all of whom 
are daily eye-witnefTes of the beneficial confe- 
quences which have arifen from thefe improve- 
ments j Jome of whom are reaping the fruits of 
them. It would be fuperfluous, it would be 
impertinent to enlarge on the fubject: for it 
mud be evident, that as Mechanics are fo effen* 
tially neceffary to manufactures, a knowledge 
of their principles muft be ufeful to every man. 
engaged in fuch branches of trade. 

With Mechanics, Hydroftatics and Hydraulics 
are fo clofely connected, that a knowledge of 
them may be confidered as a neceffary adjunct. 
For, on the principles of thefe fciences often 
depends the firft movement of the moft complete 
machines j and fire and water engines, mills, 
aqueducts, pumps, and other mechanical ftruc- 
tures, can only be brought into action by their 
afli fiance. 

Nor is the utility of Chemiftry more confined, 
or lefs connected with manufactures, than Me- 
chanics, 



Literature, &c. with Commerce. 2$ 

chanics. Indeed Chemiftry may be, not impro- 
perly, called the corner ftone of the arts. They 
not only are fupported by her, but many of them 
derive their very exiftence from this fource. 
She even furnifties inftruments to every one of 
the branches of natural philofophy we have 
enumerated. The truth of this propofition will 
be evinced, when it is confidered that metals 
cannot be feparated from their ores, nor glafs 
produced without her aid. She fupplies the 
aftronomer with his lenfes, and the mathema- 
tician with his inftruments. The air pump, 
eleclrical, hydroftatical and hydraulic machines 
cannot be constructed without her intervention; 
and fcarcely a piece of mechanifm is formed, to 
which fhe does not contribute fomething. 

In the finer arts the influence of Chemiftry is 
very confpicuous. To her the painter owes moft 
of thofe colours, by which he is enabled to give 
the refemblances of diftinguifhed perfonages to 
the inquiring eye of a grateful pofterity -, to 
place before iheir view, more clearly than words 
can exprefs, the martial deeds of the hero, and 
the firm virtue of the patriot ; and to reprefent 
thofe beauteous fcenes of nature, to the defcrip- 
tion of which, language is inadequate. Without 
Chemiftry, the fine colouring of a Titian could 
never have delighted the enraptured beholder. 
Nay, even the works of the philofopher, the 

hiftorjarj 



26 Mr. Henry on the Confiftency of 

hiftorian and the poet, are indebted to her for 
their diifufion and permanency. 

To (hew the advantages arifing from this 
fcience in all the arts through which they might 
be traced, would carry me far beyond the limits 
of my prefent defign. It may be fufficient to 
point out the connection which fubfifts between 
Chemiftry, and thofe manufactures which are 
the pride and glory of this refpeclable commer- 
cial town. 

Bleaching is a chemical operation. The end 
of it is to abftracl: the oily and phlogiftic parts 
from the yarn or cloth, whereby it is rendered 
more fit for acquiring a greater degree of white- 
nefs, and abforbingthe particles of any colouring 
materials to which it may be expofed. 

The materials for this procefs are alio the 
creatures of Chemiftry, and fome degree of che- 
mical knowledge is requifite to enable the oper- 
ator to judge of their goodnefs. Quick-lime 
is prepared by a chemical procefs. Pot-afh is 
a produdl of the fame art ; to which alfo vitriolic, 
and all the acids owe their exiftence. The 
manufacture of foap is alfo a branch of this 
fcience. All the operations of the whitfter ; 
the fteeping, wafhing and boiling in alkaline 
iixiviums ; expofing to the fun's light, fcouring, 
rubbing and blueing are chemical operations, or 
founded on chemicaj principles. The fame may 

be 



Literature) &c. with Commerce. 27 

be faid of the arts of dying and printing, by 
which thofe beautiful colours are imprefTed on 
cloths, which have contributed fo largely to the 
extenfion of the manufactures of this place. 
How few of the workmen, employed in them, 
poMefs the leafr. knowledge of the fcience to which 
their profeffion owes its origin and fupport ! If 
random chance has {tumbled on fo many im- 
provements, what might induftry and experience 
have effected, when guided by elementary know- 
ledge ? The misfortune is, that few dyers are 
chemifts, and few chemifls dyers. Practical 
knowledge thould be united to theory, in order 
to produce the mod beneficial difcoveries. The 
chemifb is often prevented from availing himfelf 
of the refult of his experiments, by the want of 
opportunities of repeating them at large : and 
the workman generally looks down with con- 
tempt on any propofals, the fubject of which is 
new to him. Yet under all thefe difadvantages, 
I believe it will be confefTed, that the arts of 
dying and printing owe much of their recent 
progrefs to the improvements of men who have 
made Chemiftry their ftudy. Much however re- 
mains to be done ; and perhaps in no refpect are 
the manufactures of this country more defective 
than in the permanency of their colours. Sen- 
fible as our manufacturers are of this defect, is it 
not flrange, that fo few of them fhould attempt 
to acquire a knowledge of thofe principles which 

would 



2 8 Mr. Henry on the Confifiency of, 13 c. 

would moft probably fupply them with the means 
of improving and fixing their dyes ? 

This fubject would afford matter for very ex- 
tenfive difquifition ; but I fear I have already 
trefpaffed on the patience of the fociety. Suffer 
me, therefore, only to requeft your indulgence 
while I point out one other fource of improve- 
ment and pleafure, confiftent with the purfuits, 
and frequently advantageous, and even neceflary 
to the bufinefs of the tradefman. 

A tafte for the Polite Arts, efpecially thofe of 
drawing and defign, fhould appear a defirable 
acquisition to the manufacturer of the finer and 
more elegant wares. If not pofiefifed of this, 
he is always dependent on others for the patterns 
of his fabrics. Whereas, were he capable of 
inventing them himfelf, he would poffefs con- 
fiderable advantages over his lefs accomplifhed 
neighbours. His imagination would continu- 
ally fupply him with fomething new; and of 
what importance novelty is, in thefe times of 
fafhion and fancy, every day's experience furnifhes 
convincing proofs. It is this fupereminent tafte 
that has diftinguifhed the productions of a Wedg- 
wood and a Bentley above all their competitors 
in the fame line of bufinefs. Such a tafte would 
doubtlefs be equally beneficial to the manu- 
facturer of the fine cotton and fillc goods of 
Manchcfter ; and he would be enabled to equal 

in 



Dr. Eafon on Cryftallization . 29 

in elegance of pattern, as he excels in ftrength 
of fabric, the manufactures of our neighbouring 
and inimical rivals. 



On Crystallization. By Alexander Eason, 
M. D. Read November 1 4, 1781. 

ALTHOUGH Nature always acts by general 
and not by partial laws, yet the particular 
mode of her operations is frequently removed 
beyond the limited powers of the human under- 
Itanding. The truth of this obfervation is 
ilrongly confirmed by all the phenomena in the 
cryftallization of falts and other fubftances, 
which, under proper circumftances, never fail 
to fhoot into mafTes or cryftals, with more or lefs 
regularity, according to the manner in which 
the procefs may have been carried on. 

Moft bodies, during their pafiage from a fluid 
to a folid ftate, feem to difcover a tendency to 
form themfelves into regular mafles of a conftant 
or given form. This tendency is highly con- 
fpicuous in the various kinds of faline fubftances, 
and perhaps is dependent on a law of nature 
which exerts itfelf, in a more general manner, 
than philofophers are apt to imagine. 

To me it feems highly probable, that the 
cryftallization of falts, the freezing of water, 

the 



jo Dr. En/en on Cryjl alligation. 

the formation of precious Hones, bafaltes, &c, 
are all the effe&s of the fame caufe ; and if we 
Conjecture that the fetting of metals is a fpecies 
of cryftallization, we fhall hot be wide of the 
truth. This much is certain, that all the femi- 
m'etals, when broken, difcover a laminated tex- 
ture, and in each particular metal thefe lamina 
are always of a given or conftant form. 

That we may, therefore, proceed with due per- 
fpicuity,- .it will be necefiary to take a nearer 
view of the fubject, and to confider, fhortly, the 
phenomena-attending the cryftallization both of 
fimple and compound bodies. The cryftalliza- 
tion of a fimple cryftallizable body may be 
affected merely by removing the caufe of its 
fluidity, fincebythis means, its component parts 
will have an opportunity of arranging themfelves 
into maffes more or lefs regular and tranfparenr, 
according to the nature of the body, and the law 
of its cryftallization. 

The lead reflection will ferve to difcover, that 
bodies may be converted from a folid to a fluid 
Hate, in two different ways, viz. either in the 
way of folution, or fufion by heat. 

Of the firft, we have endlefs examples from the 
folution of falts in water, and other fluids ; and 
the fecond may be very well illuftrated by the 
procefs of making glafs. * 

* In the lxvi vol. of the Phil. Tranf. No. 34, Mr. Keir 

gives an account of glafs forming cryftals when it paffes 

from a fluid to a folid ltate by flow degrees. 

In 



Dr. Eafov. on Cryjiailizatioft. 3 l 

In the firft of thefe cafes, the cryftallization 
is carried on by the feparation of the fluid which 
keeps the cryftallizable body in a ftate of folu- 
tion; and in- the fecond, the fame effeft is pro- 
duced by the cooling of the materials, or jhe 
extraction of their heat. If, for inftance, a fo- 
lution of the foffil fixed alkali in water be-firft: 
evaporated to a pellicle, and afterwards be 
iuffered to cool gradually, without being dif- 
turbed, the fait will (hoot into beautifully tranf- 
parent cryftals j and in like manner, if water 
be deprived, of that degree of heat which is 
requifite to preferve it in a fluid date, it will (hoot 
into radii or needle-like cryftals, which, at their 
union, form conftant angles of 60 degrees. If, 
however, the water in the firft cafe, and the heat 
in the fecond, be feparated with too much 
rapidity, the cryftals will be fmall, and more or 
lefs irregular, according to the celerity with 
which the procefs may have been conducted. 
The fame observations are equally applicable to 
all bodies of the cryftallizable kind. 

Although, in general, every cryftallizable fub- 
ftance difcovers a manifeft tendency to (hoot 
into mafies or cryftals of a peculiar form, yet we 
muft here obferve, that the forms of thofe cryftals 
are liable to great variation from various cir- 
cumftances attending their formation. 

Gypfum, for example, is well known to be 
a vitriolic fait with a calcareous bafis, and yet 

the 



21 T)r> Eafon on Cryjlallizatlon. 

the fubftance is prefented to us by nature in five 
different fhapes, to each of which naturalift3 
have given different names ; firft, the Lapis 
Specularis. 2dly. Striated Gypfum. 3dly. Gyp- 
feous Alabafter. 4thly. Selenites, properly •fo 
called. 5thly. A Gypfeous Spar, frequently found 
adhering to the fides of veins in mountains, parti- 
cularly thofe inclofing the ores of metals. All 
thefe fubftances when chemically examined, ex- 
hibit precifely the fame phenomena, and are, in 
reality, nothing but different crystallizations of 
the fame compound fait. * 

Befides the gypfums, there is another fubftance, 
which though claffed by naturalifts with earthy 
bodies, is neverthelefs a compound fait, and, 
like the gypfums, has a natural tendency to 
cryftallize or fhoot into maffes of regular forms. 
This fubftance ftrongly promotes the fufion of 
earthy fubftances, particularly thefe of the cal- 
careous and argillaceous kind, and on this account 
is generally denominated a fluor or flux, but, 

* La nature fournit beaucoup de matiere faline de meme 
efpece que celle dont nous parlons (viz. felenite) mais 
qui a differentes formes, & a laquelle les naturaliftes ont 
donne differentes noms comme gypfe ou miroir d'Ane, 
pierre a platre, albatre, fpath gypfeux, &c. mais toutes 
ces matieres font un feul & meme fel, & nous les confide- 
rerons comme telles. 

Chymie Experimentale Sc Raifonee, par 
Mr. Baume, Tom. I. p. 154. 

in 



Dr. Eafon on Cryftallization, 23 

in England, is better known by the name of 
Derbyfhire Spar. All the bodies belonging to 
this clafs have- lately been (hewn to confift of 
a calcareous earth, and an acid of a very peculiar 
nature, which has the property of corroding glafs, 
and of converting water into flint. Flint, there- 
fore, is probably not a fimple earth, as philofo- 
phers have generally fuppofed, but a compound 
fubltance, confiding of water, and this lately 
difcovered acid. 

The verifiable, or flinty earths, bear, never - 
thelefs, (tronger marks of a fimple fubftance, than 
any body hitherto known ; and we are now cer- 
tain, that it forms the bafis of rock cryftals, * 
and a part of the whole tribe of precious (tones 
except the diamond. All thefe (lories have 
evidently been formed by the crystallization of 
the matters which enter into their compofition ; 
and all the phenomena relating to their figure, 



* II feroit d'ailleurs difficile de penetrer affez profonde- 
ment dans le interieur du globe pour recueiller de la terre pri- 
mitive, & qui n'auroit eprouv6 aucune alteration. II paroit 
certain, que fi Ton pouvoit fe procurer de cette efpece de 
terre, & un degre de feu fuffifant pour la faire entrer 
en fufion, on la reduiroit en une mafle auffi belle que le 
beau cryftnl de roche, & qu'on ne pourroit diftinguer Pun 
de l'autre. 

Chymie Experimental & Raifonnee, par 
Mr. Baume, Tom. I. p. 104. 

Vol. I. D tran f. 



34 £)?• Eqfon on Cryfiallization. 

tranfparency, &c. bear a ftrong analogy to thofc 
of the faline cryftals already defcribed. 

Each faline fubftance, of which there is a 
great variety, fhoots, as already obferved, into 
cryftals of a figure and degree of tranfparency 
peculiar to kfelf : and the fame thing is true, in 
general, with regard to gems or precious ftones. 
Thus, the diamond is naturally of one form, the 
ruby of another, the fapphire of a third, &c. and 
each of them pofiefies a degree of tranfparency 
different from all the reft. 

Among philofophers it has long been a 
queftion, from what ftate the precious ftones 
have cryftallized ? that is, whether their particles 
were originally fufpended in water, or reduced 
to a fluid ftate by the action of a very intenfe 
heat ? Each of thefe opinions has been efpoufed 
by men of the firft abilities and reputation, and 
feveral arguments have been urged on both fides 
of the queftion. 

From analogy, and feveral fafts, which will 
afterwards appear, there is room, I am per- 
fuaded, to conjecture, that all precious ftones, 
with many other mineral bodies, have been 
originally in a ftate of fufion,- by means of heat, 
from which they have been formed by the law of 
cryftallization. 

Pure verifiable earth, indeed, cannot be 
brought into fufion by the heat of our furnaces > 
but black flint has been melted without addi- 
tion 



Br. Eafon on Cryjiallization. 35 

tion by the concentrated rays of the fun ; and, 
perhaps, there are, or have been, degrees of 
heat in nature, fufficient to produce the fame 
effect. Is it not poflible, that thofe immenfe 
fires, which feem to be the caufe of earthquakes 
and burning mountains, are fufficiently ftrong 
to bring into fufion the pureft kind of vitrifiable 
earth ? Is it not probable, that from fufions 
thus effected the whole tribe of precious Hones 
have been formed by crystallization ?* 

If this conjecture has any foundation in nature, 
it will enable us to account in a very fatisfactory 
manner for all the peculiar properties obfervable 
in this clafs of bodies. If the melted matter, in 
which the vitrifiable earth is diffufed, be fuffici- 
ently fluid, and if the crystallization be carried 
on with due regularity, the cryftals will be well 
formed, and will exclude from their compofition 
all heterogeneous matters. If, however, the 
melted matter be too tenacious, or, if the procefs 
be carried on with too much rapidity, the cryftals 
will be irregular, and involve in their compofition 
more or kfs heterogeneous matters, according to 

The difficulty of accounting for the fufion of the 
earth, conftituting the precious Hones, is obviated by the 
experiments of the celebrated Bergman, whofe analyfis of 
thefe fubilances had not been feen by the author, at the 
time of writing this paper. For, from thefe it appears, 
that the gems contain not only vitrifiable, but argillaceous 
and calcareous earth. 

D 1 circum- 



oS Dr. Eafon on Cryftallizatldn. 

cirtumftances, which need not be mentioned. * 
Thus, for inftance, an admixture of metals may 
give to the cryftal different colours, fuch as 
the ruby, the emerald, the topaz, or the 
amethyftjf and * when the cr y ftal is perfectly 
pure, it conftitutes the colourlefs rock cryftal. 

Is not this hypothefis ftrongly fupported by 
the diffipation of the colours of the precious 
Hones ? And is not the reftoration of thofe co- 
lours a ftriking proof, that this hypothefis is 
founded in nature ? 

Three principles, at lead, feem to enter into the 
compofition of precious ftones, viz. verifiable 
earth, the metallic calces on which their colours 
depend, and the particular matter determining 
the figure into which they cryftallize ; the variety 
of which might be inftanced by feveral examples. 
The prefence of the principle juft mentioned is 
ftill further indicated by the different degree of 
hardnefs obfervable in precious ftones. The 
rock cryftal, although as colourlefs and tranfpa- 
rent as the purefl: diamond, is, neverthelefs, the 

* When cryftals are found irregular and not pure, the 
vulgar expreflion is, that they are not ripe ; but the truth 
is, they never could ripen, though left to the end of time, 
on account of fome heterogeneous matters having entered 
into their compofition. 

f Bergman has ftiewn that all thefe colours may be 
imparted to gems by iron only. 

fofteft 



Br. Eafcn on CryftalUzation. XJ 

fofteft of the whole clafs to which it belongs.* 
Had thefe fatts been fufficiently attended to, the 
component parts of precious ftones had probably 
been better underftood, and the different figures 
of thefe fubftances might have been fhewn to 
have proceeded from one conftant and permanent 
law of cryftallization. 

But, be this as it may, the principles already 
in our pofTeffion are fufficient to fupport a 
rational theory, not only of the formation of pre- 
cious ftones, but alfo of thofe fubftances known 
by the name of pebbles. Many fubftances which, 
under proper circumftances, fhoot into cryftals 
of the moft regular form, concrete into diforderly 
maffes, when the procefs is carried on with too 
much precipitation. Have we not reafon there- 
fore to conjecture, that pebbles, agates, and even 
common flint are the produces of fome fuch irre- 
gular crystallization ? This may be exemplified 
in the pebbles found among the rocks of 
Arthur's feat near Edinburgh, which are a veri- 
fiable matter, mixed with different heterogeneous 
fubftances, from which a variety of colours and 
irregular fhapes is produced -, and the rocks, 

* The topaz feems to be an exacl rock cryftal with a 
yellow colour, probably from the calx of fome metal; it is. 
a prifm of fix irregular fides. I have feen fome of them of 
3 very large fize; many are found in the mountains of 
Scotland, and, fometimes, at the foot of mountains, buried 
jn the earth, having been waflied down by the rains. 

P 3 where 



38 Br. Eqfon on Cryftallization. 

¦where the pebbles are found, feem to have de- 
rived their origin from lava or volcanic matter.* 

That the effects of volcanos are more exten- 
five than philofophers, till of late, have been 
aware of, will, I am perfuaded, be readily ac- 
knowledged; and by the help of many obferva- 
tions lately made, we are enabled to account for 
various phenomena, which otherwife, muft have 
remained for ever unintelligible to the human 
fpecies. Of thefe, however, we mall only take 
notice of thofe columnar pillars called Bafaltes, 
or Giant's caufeways. If we carefully attend to 
all the phenomena, obfervable in thefe produc- 
tions of nature, we mail find reafon to conclude, 
that they are nothing more than ciyftallizations 
of lava or matter, brought into a ftate of fufion 
by the heat of fubterraneous fires. 

If ever it could be faid, that nature feemed to 
imitate art, it is in the formation of the Giant's 
caufeways in the north of Ireland, where every 
pillar appears to have been hewn by an artift, and 
placed fo clofe to each other, as fcarce to admit 
a pin betwixt them. Their general figures are 
pentagons, hexagons and heptagons. Pillars with 
more fides are to be met with ; their fides, how- 
ever, are by no means equal. Each pillar, accord- 
ing to its number of fides, muft be furrounded 

* Quere, what is the reafon why flint is generally found 
among chalk or calcareous earths ? 

by 



Dr. Eqfon on Cryftallization. 39 

by a like number of pillars, which differ from 
each other both in fhape and in fize, as not any 
two of them have been found alike in every 
refpect. Thefe pillars are moreover divided into 
joints, at unequal diftances, which, by the afiift- 
ance of a crow of iron, may be forced afunder j 
and, what is very remarkable, a pillar, feparated 
at thofe joints, always (hews one end convex, and 
the other concave; the convexity being fome- 
times turned from, and fometimes towards the 
horizon ; but, in any fingle pillar, the direction 
js always the fame. 

Have we not every reafon to conclude, thai 
the ifland of Staffa, and the Giant's caufeways 
have been productions of volcanic matter, made 
liquid by fome fubterraneous fire, and, as foon 
as it cooled by flow degrees, cryftallized into thai 
form which they now exhibit ? Had the fepara- 
tion of thefe pillars been owing to accident, they 
would have appeared like cracks in the earth, 
formed during a very dry feafon, without order, 
beauty or regularity ; whereas the reverfe is very 
conlpicuous. 

By attending to die fails and obfervations 
already related, it will, I am perfuaded, appear, 
that the fetting of metals is, in reality, a fpecies 
of crystallization. This idea is ftrongly con- 
firmed, by the laminated' texture which all the 
femimetals difcover, when broken in any direc- 
tion. The needle-like cryftals, fp confpicuous 

P4 m 



40 Br. Eajon on CryJlaTrzatiotn 

in crude antimony, clearly fhew, that this fub* 
fiance, during its formation, has been acted upon 
by fome caufe, either the fame, or fome other, 
very analogous to that, by which the precious 
Hones, bafaltes, &c. are made to cryftallize. * 
The fame thing is true with refpecl to bifmuth; 
and even pure filver, during its paflage from a 
fluid to a folid ftate, difcovers a tendency to form 
on its furface a number of ftrise, which no doubt 
proceed from a difpofition of the metal to cryftal- 
lize, or arrange its particles in a particular order. 

The expanfion of water, during its freezing, 
is now univerfally allowed to be occafioned by 
the cryftallization of its parts. And, to me, it 
fcems probable, that the expanfion of bifmuth 
and iron, in fimilar circumftances, proceeds from 
the fame caufe. f 

Lead ore, when tolerably pure, is generally 
found in maffes of a cubic form 5 though, fome- 
times, in fhape of prifms. Perhaps this variety is 

* Iobferved at Warrington (where copper ore is fmelted) 
the drofs and flux which fwim on the top of the metal 
ip the furnace in a liquid ftate, are caft into moulds in 
ihape of a double cube; thefe mafles, when cold, very 
much refemble Java or volcanic matter, and, when broken, 
evidently (hew a cryftalline appearance in many parts, 
efpecially about the corners. 

¦f Figures caft from melted iron are always very iharp, 
becaufe that metal expands as it cools, by which means the 
whole dye or mould is completely filled. 

owing 



Mr. Henry en the Prefervation, &c. 41 

owing to the proportion of filver contained in 

the ores. 

Some writers affirm, that native gold has been 
found in a cryftallized ftate, and the form it 
aflumes is that of a prifm of eight fides. 

With thefe obfervations 1 ftiall conclude this 
paper, which has been extended to an unreafon- 
able length, for which, I hope, the importance 
of the fubject will plead my excufe. 



On the Preservation of Sea Water from 
Putrefaction by Means of Quicklime. By 
Thomas Henry, F. R. S. to which is added, an 
Account of a newly invented Machine for impreg- 
nating Water or other Fluids with Fixed 
Air, &c. communicated to Mr. Henry by 
I. Haygarth, M. B. F. R. S. Read Novem-* 
her 21, 1781. 

IT has been frequently remarked by chemical 
and philofophical writers, that a new experi- 
ment is fcldom made in vain. Though the ope- 
rator may even fail of attaining the immediate 
object of his purfuir, he may yet, fortuitoufly, 
acquire the knowledge of fome new fa£r, which 
may be productive of improvemant and advan- 
tage to fcience, 

About 



42 Mr. Henry on the Vrejervalion 

About the time I publifhed my method of pre- 
ferving water, at fea, from putrefaction, &c. * 
a Gentleman, who had obtained a quantity of fea 
water, for the purpofe of bathing a child, com- 
plained to me that it foon became putrid, and re- 
quefted that I would think of fome expedient to 
preferve it. 

The principal falts contained in fea water are, 
ift. common marine or culinary fait, compounded 
of foiTil alkali and marine acid ; id\y. a fait 
formed by the union of the fame acid with magne- 
fian earth ; and laftly, afmall quantity of felenite. 
The quantity of faline matter contained in a pint 
of fea water, in the Britifh feas, is according to 
Neuman, about one ounce in each pint, f When 
this water is flowly evaporated, the common fait 
firft cryftallizes, and the marine magnefian fait 
js left in, what is called, the bittern, from which, 

* An account of a method cf preferving water, at fea, 
from putrefaction, and of reftoring to the water its original 
purity and pleafantnefs, by a cheap and eafy procefs, &c. 
London, 1781. 

f In Sir Torbern Bergman's analyfis of fea water taken 
pp, in the beginning of June 1776, about the latitude of 
the' Canaries, from the depth of fixty fathoms ? the folid. 
contents of a pint of the water were 

Grs. 
Of common fait 25311 

Salited magnefia 69 I * T lor 5 3 Grs. 
(Sypfum 8-V / S » i°r 9 . 

Total 33°trJ 

by 



of Sea Water, tic, 43 

by a fubfequent procefs, the purging bitter fait, 
commonly named Epfom fait, is obtained. By 
this feparation, the fea or bay fait is rendered 
much better adapted for the prefervation of ani- 
mal fubftances, than the fait of the rocks and 
fprings in Cheihire and Worcefterlhire, where, 
from & what I apprehend, to be a miftaken notion, 
that this bittern does not exift in the brine, the 
liquor is fo haftily evaporated, that the cryftals 
of common fait retain much of the magnefian 
fait among them. For the magnefian fait is 
highly feptic, and greatly impairs the properties 

of the other, * 

The two methods which occurred to me, as 
likely to anfwer the wifties of my friend, were, 
ift. the addition of quicklime, and 2dly, that of 
common fait. To the trial of the former I was 
induced by its known antifeptic effeas on com- 
mon water ; and, it is afcertained, that a fmali 
portion of common fait promotes, whereas i* 
larger retards, putrefaction. 

EXPERIMENT I. 

To one quart of fea water were added two 
fcruples of frelh quicklime - 3 to another, half an 

• At fome of the works at Northwich, the evaporation is 
carried on, in fo gentle a manner, that large cubical cryftals. 
are formed ; and the fait thus prepared is faid to be equal in 
ftrcngth to bay fait. 

ounce 



44 Mr- Henry on the Prejervation 

ounce of common culinary fait; and a third was 
kept as a ftandard, without any addition. The 
mouths of the bottles being loofely covered with 
paper, they were expofed to the action of the fun, 
in fome of the hotteft weather of the lad fummer. 

In about a week, the ftandard became very 
offenfive; and the water, with the additional 
quantity of fait, did not continue fweet many 
hours longer; whereas, that with lime, continued 
many months, without ever exhibiting the lead 
marks of putridity. 

ft feemed probable, that all, or fome, of three 
changes had been effected by this procefs. It 
was fufpected, that quicklime might decompofe 
the marine fait, with alkaline bafis ; a power 
which it has lately been fuppofed to pofiefs, 
vnder certain circumftances : or that its antifep- 
tic powers might depend on the formation of a 
lime water •, by either of which, a material, and, 
perhaps, unfavourable, alteration might be pro- 
duced : or laftly, that the precipitation of the 
earthy bafis of the magnefian fait, by the quick- 
lime, might contribute to the prefervation of 
the fea water. 

EXPERIMENTS II. & III. 

On fubmitting the water to which the lime had 
been added, to the common trials for detecting a 
difengaged alkali, no figns of fuch a fait were 
difcovered. And upon blowing into it a long 

continued, 



of Sea Water^ l$c. 4$ 

continued ftream of air from the lungs, no pre- 
cipitation nor cloudinefs enfued, as in the cafe of 
lime water. 

It remained to fee, whether the precipitation of 
the magnefian earth, from its acid, had been ef- 
fected. Under fome circumftances, it has been 
proved, by the very ingenious Dr. Black, that 
magnefia will precipitate calcareous earth from 
acids. As, for inftance, if mild magnefia be 
thrown into a folution of calcareous earth, in 
marine or nitrous acid, the calcareous earth will 
be precipitated; the fum of the attraflion 
between this earth and fixed air, and between 
the magnefia and the acid, being greater than 
thofe which fubfifted between the magnefia and 
the air, and between the calcareous earth and 
the acid. But, if cauftic calcareous earth be 
added to a folution of magnefia in thofe acids 
its affinity to the acid is, in this Mate, increafed, 
no fixed air attracts it, and it precipitates the 
magnefia. 

EXPERIMENT IV. 

To fome of the fea water, which had been kept 
as a ftandard, fome lime water was added, and a 
turbidnefs immediately took place, fucceeded by 
a copious precipitation. This, at firfr, con- 
vinced an ingenious Member of this Society, 
Dr. Eafon, who happened to be prefent, and my- 
felf, that we had difcovered the manner in which 

the 



46 Mr. Henry on the Prefer vat ion 

the lime acled, and the reafon why no lime water 
was produced. But, on adding lime water alfo to 
fome of the fea water which had been preferved 
by the lime, a cloudinefs and precipitation 
refembling the former took place, and ftaggered 
us in our theory; for we imagined, that the 
portion of quicklime had been fufficient to have 
precipitated the whole of the magnefia which the 
water might have contained, and we now fuf- 
pedted, that the folution of the lime, was, there- 
fore, probably prevented by the fea fait. 

Other avocations prevented my purfuing the 
inquiry at that time, but I have fince relumed 
it, and been able to elucidate the whole matter. 

EXPERIMENT V. 

Into a ftrong folution of the common Chefliire 
fait, fome lime water was poured. The mixture 
became turbid, and a white earth was feparated, 
which did not fink to the bottom of the glafs, but 
was fufpended, partly, on the furface, and, partly, 
in the midft of the liquor. 

But from whence did this precipitate proceed ? 
Was it the lime thrown down by the fait ; or did 
the lime feparate fomething from the common 
fait? 

EXPERIMENT VI. 

To a portion of the fame folution, inftead of 
lime water, fome drops of a folution of foflil 

alkali 



of Sea Water y &c, 47 

alkali were added, and the fame appearances 
occurred. 

EXPERIMENT VII. 

Each of thefe precipitates were rapidly and 
wholly difiblved, the greateft part of the water 
being firft poured off, on the addition of a few 
drops of dilute vitriolic acid. A proof that the 
precipitated earth was magnefia. 

EXPERIMENT VIII. 

To determine whether the addition of a por- 
tion of bitter purging fait, to a folution of com- 
mon f?.lr, would prevent the forming of lime 
water, with an equal quantity of lime to that 
which had prefer ved the fea water, I mixed 
twenty grains of quicklime, {even drachms of 
common fait, and one drachm of bitter purging 
fait with a pint of rain water; but no lime water 
was produced. Whereas, a lime water was 
formed, by an equal quantity of lime with a pint 
of rain water, and alfo with a folution of common 
fait, from which the earthy matter it contained 
had been previoufly precipitated by foflil alkali, 
and the alkali neutralifed by marine acid. 

The next queftion that prefented itfelf to my 

investigation, was, whether the common Chefhire 

fait was fo impregnated with magnefian fait, 

as to prevent the forming lime water, with a like 

quantity of lime, when ufed in the proportion 

of an ounce of fait to a pint of water. 

E X P E- 



48 Mr. Henry on the Preservation 

EXPERIMENT IX. 

Thefe proportions of Chefhire fait, quicklime, 
and rain water, being mixed, and fufFered to ftand 
a fufficient time, the filtered liquor exhibited no 
fi»ns of being impregnated with unneutralifed 
lime: but, on adding a few drops of lixivium 
tartari, it inftantly became very turbid, and de^ 
pofited a fediment, which, inftead of difappearing 
on the addition of vitriolic acid, formed a fele- 
nite with it, and again fettled at the bottom of 
the glafs. 

EXPERIMENT X. 

Five grains of quicklime, being added to the 
mixture of the ninth experiment, and the liquor, 
after due time, being filtered, and fubjedted to 
the ufual teft, exhibited evident marks of having 
become a lime water. 

I now began to fufpect, that the portion of 
quicklime, added to the fea water, in the firft 
experiment, had not been fufficient to precipitate 
the whole of the magnefia from its acid, and 
having fome of the mixture of that experiment 
ftill by me, I again turned my attention to it. 

EXPERIMENT XI. 

The remaining part of the fea water, to which 
the quicklime had been added, was about a pint 
and half. Lime water, being added to a fmall 

pare 



cf Sea Water y &c. 49 

part of it, the fame turbid appearance took place 
as formerly. 

EXPERIMENT XII. 

On the addition of another drachm of lime, the 
water, when filtered, no longer became turbid, 
on the mixture of lime water to it ; but it did not 
yet exhibit any figns of being itfelf a lime water. 
But, 

EXPERIMENT XIII. 

"When I added another drachm of lime, a 
lime water was formed. For the water now be- 
came very turbid, on blowing air into it from 
the lungs. 

Theie experiments, therefore, not only prove 
that fea water may be preferved for the purpofes 
of bathing, by means of quicklime, without 
forming a lime water, but they point out the 
rationale of this phenomenon ; and alfo inftruct 
11s what portion of lime may be ufed, without a 
lime water being produced. 

It appears that quicklime, diflblved in water, 
precipitates the magnefian earth from the marine 
acid, with which it is united in the fea water, 
and, uniting with that acid, is retained in the 
water, tinder the form of a marine felenite. 
What the water lofes, therefore, of one fait, it 
gains of another. At the fame time, the 
magnefia, being precipitated by a caufiic cal- 
careous earth, falls in a ftate fimilar to that 
Vol. I. E to 



£o Mr. Henry on the Preffrvation 

to which it is reduced by calcination, viz. void 
of fixed air. In this ftate, I have formerly 
proved, by a train of experiments, that it is 
ftrongly antifeptic. * Being infoluble, the water 
is preferved without forming any combination 
with it j and the only alteration that is made in 
the component parts of the fea water, is, that the 
earthy marine fait changes its bafis of magnefia 
for one that is calcareous. 

We alfo fee, that there are limits to the addition 
of quicklime, beyond which, we cannot proceed, 
without forming lime water. The quantity of 
two fcruples, to a quart of fea water, though not 
fufficient to decompofe the whole of the magnefian 
fait, was yet adequate to the prefervation of the 
water. One drachm more of quicklime feparated 
the whole of the magnefia, and, when a further 
addition was made, a lime water was immediately 

formed, f 

The properties of common fait, as an antifeptic, 

are greatly weakened by the portion of marine 

* From thefe experiments it appeared, that magnefia 
alba, while poffefTed of its fixed air, is highly feptic to 
animal flefh, but antifeptic to bile ; whereas, when cal- 
cined, and deprived of its fixed air, it is ftrongly anti- 
feptic both to flefh and bile. 

See Henry's Experiments and Obfervations, 
p. 58. & feq. 

f Thefe proportions may vary, according to the ftrength 
of the quicklime employed. 

magnefiafl 



of Sea Water > &c. 51 

tmgnefian fait, mixed wich it. It is probable, 
that the marine felenite may be lefs feptic, and 
lefs foluble in water, fo as to feparate, during 
the evaporation of the brine. Ifib, the addition 
of quicklime may be ufeful, previous to that 
procefs at the fait works. But we are fo little 
acquainted with the properties of calcareous falts, 
that, at prefent, we cannot determine whac 
might be the effects of fuch a practice. I propofe, 
however, at fome future opportunity, to try, 
whether the calcareous marine fait will thus fepa- 
rate; and whether it be, in itfelf, feptic, or 
antifeptic. 



Dr. Haygarth, of Chefter, who is not more 
diftinguifhed for his extenfive knowledge, than 
for his friendly and benevolent difpontion, has 
lately, in the moftobliging manner, communicated 
to me, a defcription of an apparatus, which he 
has invented to mix air with liquids. The 
Doctor apprehended, that this method might 
facilitate my defign of precipitating the lime 
from water, to which it might have been added 
on fhip board; and, with his ufual candour, and 
generofity, delivered up his invention to my 
fervice. The plan is truly ingenious, but I fear, 
and all my friends, whom I have confulted, agree 
with me in the apprehenfion, that the machine 
would be much too complex to admit of being 

E 2 ufed 



52 Mr. Henry on the Prefervatkn 

ufed at Tea. It is capable, however, of being 
applied to fo many ufeful purpofes, that, I truft, 
the Society will think the communication of this 
valuable improvement well worthy of their at- 
tention. 

Defcription of an Apparatus to mix Air with Liquid:. 

In the figure, plate i. an efFervefcing veffel is 
reprefented (at E) in which fixed air is detached 
from a mixture of calcareous earth, and vitriolic 
acid, conveyed through the tubes (T /) into the 
air veffel (A). The fixed air, being of greater 
fpecific gravity, will fall to the bottom, and 
expel the common air at the top through the 
orifice (at O). It may be known when the veffel 
is full of fixed air, byfmelling; or extinguishing 
a candle at this orifice; or by. computing the 
quantity of vitriolic acid and calcareous earth 
that will generate a certain quantity of air. A 
pair of common bellows (at B) with a pipe, a few 
inches lon^ei than ufual and. bent, is placed with 
the vent fo as to receive the air pipe (P), and 
the bellows pipe at (J?) is inferted into the top 
of the water veffel (W). The bellows being 
worked, the fixed air rifes, from the bottom of the 
air veffel, through the pipe (P P) into the vacuum 
within the bellows, and is impelled, with force, 
through the bellows pipe (b) into the body of 
the water veffel, filled with lime water, or any 
other kind of liquid. The air, which is not 
abforbed by the liquid, rifes to the furface in 

bubbles 



of Sea Water ', &c, $3 

bubbles occafioning confiderable agitation; and 
returns into the air vefTel through the com- 
munication (CC.) That portion of fixed air, 
which is incapable of abforption by lime water, 
&c. being fpecifically lighter than the reft, 
will efcape through the orifice (at O) as the fixed 
air is fupplied by the effervescing mixture, buc 
the pure fixed air, thus returned into the air 
vefTel, is again inhaled by the bellows, and blowa 
into the lime water. The air and water vefTels, 
in the model I have had made, are of tin, con- 
taining about four gallons a-piece. The orifices 
(at T, t, B, b } ) are made air-tight, with per- 
forated corks. The tubes (P, p and t) run 
down the fides of the air vefTels. The tube (b) 
which is a continuation of the bellows pipe, runs 
down the middle of the water vefTel. This pipe 
might be immerfed twelve or thirteen inches into 
the body of the water, as I have found, that a pair 
of common bellows, will force air through water, 
to this depth, with moderate exertion. 

In my model, the bfllows, contrary to my 
direction, are of a large fize, and there was diffi- 
culty in working them, as might be expected, 
when all the orifices are fhut. To obviate this 
inconvenience, I tied a bladder, full of fixed air, 
upon the orifice (at O) and opening into the air, 
vefTel. By this device, the bellows work with 
as much eafe as in the open air ; and the bladder 
fills and empties exactly like the lungs in refpira-. 

E 3 lion, 



54 Dr. Barnes on Toe try. 

tion. The tube P, p fhould be of the fame dia- 
meter as the vent of the bellows, and the com- 
munication (CC) fhould not be of a lefs fize, 
otherwife the water will rife into the bellows 
when they are worked. 

After this defcription, it would be fuperliuous 
to explain, that, in this procefs, there would be 
no lofs of fixed air or of time ; or to obferve, 
that from the known attraction between fixed air 
and quicklime, afufficient quantity of lime water 
might be freed from lime in a fhort time, fo as to 
fupply a fhip's company with little trouble or 
expence. 



On the rial ure and ejjential Characters cf Poetry, 
as diftinguijloed from Prose. By Thomas 
Barnes, D. D. Read December 5, 178 1. 

TO fettle with precifion the limits which 
divide poetic from profaic compofition, may 
perhaps appear, at firft fight, to be neither very 
difficult, nor very interefting. As, however, 
one great objecl: of this fociety is, the enjoyment 
of free and friendly converfation upon fubjects 
connected with fcience, it is probable, that 
topics, which are not in themfelves of the greateft 
importance, may fometimes open a wider field, 
than others of more intrinfic excellence. Where 

much 



Vr. Barnes on Poetry. 55 

much may be faid in fupport of different hypo- 
thefes, we may hope for that collifion of friendly- 
argument, which may ftrike out fome fparks, 
both of amufement and information. Thus, a 
comparatively trifling Subject may eventually 
contribute to the nobleft ufes, to the exercife of 
the mental faculties, and to the diffufion of can- 
dour, and intelligence. Our time will not be 
quice mifpent, if we can only glean from the 
topic before us, a fingle hour's agreeable and 
literary entertainment. 

f* Wherein confifts the ejfence of poetry," is a 
queftion, which it will not be fo eafy to anfwer, 
as may at fir ft be imagined. Different authors 
have given very different definitions. Some 
have denominated it, " The art of exprefling 
our thoughts by fiction." Others have imagined 
its effence to lie, in <c The power of imitation :"-— 
and others again, in " The art of giving plea- 
sure." But it is evident, that fiffion, imitation, 
and pleqfure, are not the properties of poetry 
alone. Profaic compofition may contain the moft 
ingenious fables. It may prefent the moft ftrik- 
ing rejemblances. It may infpire the moft kn~ 
fible delight. 

Poetry has been generally denominated an 
ART. Horace, if he himfelf gave the title to 
hjs own celebrated and admirable poem, has 
characterized it under th^t name. The term, 
jtfelf (ncrcn:) would naturally lead to the fame 

k 4 idea 5 



5 6 Dr. Barnes on "Poetry, 

idea; for it feems to imply, that labour and in- 
genuity, the necefTary companions of art, muft 
be employed in poetic compofition. But cer- 
tainly, it has the neareft affinity to fcience of any 
other art ; for all its excellence confifts, in its 
prefenting fcience in a peculiar and engaging 
drefs. An art, by which fcience is affifted, and 
fentiment exalted ; by which the imagination is 
elevated, the heart delighted, and the nobleft 
palTioris of the human foul exprefTcd, improved, 
and heightened, will appear important enough, 
to have its boundaries exactly drawn, and the 
limits afcertained, which divide it from its humble 
neighbour. Or, if this be not poffible, to have 
its general and larger chara&criftics clearly repre- 
fented. 

What is it, then, which conftitutes the poetic 
effence, and diftinguifhes it from profe ? Is it 
metre? — Or is it fomething entirely different; 
fublimity of sentiment, boldnefs of figure, 
grandeur of description, or embellifhment of 
imagination ? Let us attend to the arguments, 
which may be offered on behalf of both thefe 

hypothefes. 

" The char acleriftic nature of poetry, it may be 
faid, confifts in elevation of thought, in ima- 
gery, in ornament." 

"For, have there not been real poems formed, 
without the fhackle of regular verle ? Poems, 
which none, but a faftidious critic, would fcruple 

a moment 



Dr. Barms on Poetry, 57 

a moment to honour with that name ? Is not 
Telemachus a noble epic poem ? For who 
would dare to degrade it to a lower character ? 
Who would refufe the appellation to, the Death of 
Abel, which thofe, who underftand the German 
language, fpeak of with fo much rapture ? Or 
to the Incas of -Marmontel, which the French 
celebrate, with equal enthufiafm of praife ! 

" Does not elevation of fentiment of itfelf 
produce modulation of language ? The foul, in«| 
fpired with great ideas, naturally treads with a 
lofty fbep. There is a dignity in all her move- 
ments. She declaims, with a meafured, folemn, 
majtftic utterance. Her ftile is fonorous, and 
fwelling. Thefe attributes indicate ; thefe con- 
Jiitute the poet. They give ftrength and feeling 
to his compofitions. Where thefe are found, 
who would look for any higher claims, before he 
would confer the palm of poetic honours ? Where 
thefe are wanting, what other properties could 
give, even the fhadow of a title? Who would 
refufe the title of bard to the great Mafter-of 
Hebrew fong? For what can be more truly fub- 
lime, or poetical, than many of the Pfalms of 
David ? And yet, after the ingenious labours 
of the learned Dr. Lowth, the metre or rhythm 
has not been exactly afcertained ; and probably 
will not, becaufe it does not exift. The har- 
mony of numbers, of which every ear muft be 
fenfible, ariles purely from the native impul/e of a/ 

foul. 



§§ Dr. Barnes on Poetry I 

foul, infpired with fentiments, which it could 
not poflibly exprefs in any language, but what 
was fervid and poetical. 

" By this theory, it may be faid, we account 
for the common remark, that the original language 
of mankind was poetical : becaufe, in the infancy 
of the world, every thing would naturally excite 
admiration, and vehement paffion. Their rude 
?.nd imperfecl: fpeech would bear infcribed upon it, 
the ftamp of ftrong and animated feeling. It 
would refemble the harangues of Indian orators, 
at this day, whofe fpeeches are accompanied with 
tones and geftures, which to a cultivated 
European, appear extravagantly pompous. Their 
jives were full of danger and variety. New 
fcenes were continually opening upon them. 
Growing arts and fciences were prefenting new 
objects of curiofity. Hence, their feelings were 
amazingly intenfe. And hence their language was 
boid, and poetically fublime. Longinus, in the 
fragment of a treatife, which is unhappily loft, 
has this ientiment. " Meafure belongs properly 
to poetry, as it perfonates the paffions,, and their 
language ; it ufes fiction and fable, which naturally 
produce numbers and harmony." 

It may be added, in fupport of this definition^ 
** That our own inimitable poet, than whom none 
feems more to have enjoyed the infpiration of the 
Mufe, dcfcribes the poet, as chiefly diftinguiihed 
by the fervour of Imagination. He does not^ 

indeed. 



Dr. Barnes on Poetry, 59 

indeed, afilgn him the mod honourable company ; 
but he makes ample amends, by a defcription of 
poetic fancy, wonderfully brilliant and captiva- 
ting. 

'* The lunatic, the lover, and the poet, 

Are of imagination all compact. 

One fees more devils than vail hell can hold, 

That is the madman : the lover, all as frantic, 

Sees Helen's beauty on a brow of Egypt : 

The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling, 

Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven j 

And, as imagination bodies forth 

The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen 

Turns them to fhapes, and gives to airy nothing 

A local habitation and a name." Shakespeare. 

Who can forbear applying to the poet, what has 
been fo jul'Uy applied to the great critic, lately 
quoted, 

" He is himself the great sublime he draws!" 

f( Horace, likewife, feems to rank himfelf on 
this fide of the queftion in the fourth Satire of 
his firit book, where he endeavours to fettle the 
point of Poetic Character. He, firft, excepts 
himfelf from the number of thofe, to whom he 
would allow the name of Poet •, becaufe compo- 
litions like his own, "fermoni propiora" do not 
give a juft claim to the appellation. He, then, 
^efcribes the real bard ; 

Incenium cui fit; cui mens divinor, atque'os 
Magna son at y rum, des nominis hujus honorem. 

With 



6o Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 

With refpett to himfelf, and to LuciJius, he tells 
us, that if you take away the order and the 
meafure, their verfes would become " fermo 
merus," mere profe. Not fo, if you take in, 
pieces that line of Ennius, 

" Poflquam difcordia tetra 
Belli ferratos poftes, portafque refregit." 

For then, he exclaims, 

" Invenias etiam disjecti membra poet^e !" 
The true poetic effence, then confifts in eleva- 
tion, imagery, and grandeur ; to which modu- 
lation is no more than an adjunct j necefTary in- 
deed, becaufe it, in fome degree, necefiarily 
accompanies animated and poetic fentiment. ,> 

To thefe arguments, it may be replied : 

" That the modefly of Horace, in excepting him- 
felf from the rank and honours of poetic character, 
will not be admitted, even with refpect to thofe 
verfes, as to which alone, he made the exception. 
For, who has not in every age claflfed the Epiftles 
and Satires of Horace, in the number of poetic 

compofitions, though, as he fays, his ftile only 

" Pede certo 
Differt fermoni : fermo merus." 

" If we adhere rigoroufly to this definition, ihali 
we not exclude many candidates, from whom 
we fhould be forry to pluck the well-earned 
wreath of poetic fame ? All verfes, where the 
iubject is low or ridiculous, as the Hudibras op 

Putler j 



Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 61 

Butler; where it is Jimp le and narrative, as the 
Fables of Gay ; or even, where it is plaintive 
and melancholy, as the Church Yard of Gray, 
muft be banifhed from the region of the Mufe. 
ParnafTus muft be, c all cliff,' without a fingle 
vale in all its circuit. None muft then be 
deemed a poet, who cannot foar to its loftieft 
fummit, on Epic, or Heroic wing. If we (hould 
form an index expurgatorius upon this principle, 
what havock fhould we make among the minor 
poets ? How many fhould we exclude, whom 
every lover of the Mufe ranks, with grateful vene- 
ration, in the number of her infpired votaries ? 

"Elevation of fentiment, imagery, and creative 
fancy, are not to be found in poetry alone. 
They often belong as much to the Orator. For 
where will you find nobler flights of imagination, 
loftier fentiments, bolder addrefles to the pafilons, 
or more animated, we might fay, modulated 
language, than in the Orations of Cicero ; not to 
mention thofe of our modem orators, whofe elo- 
quence, however, we would not fcruple to com- 
pare with that of the moft admired antients ? 

" If we might argue from the name, poetry, we 
fhould naturally conclude, that the antients 
themfelves underftood by the term, not thofe 
irregular modulations, which naturally arofe 
from the impulfe of ftrong and impaffioned feel- 
ings, from grandeur of fentiment, from beauty, 
or boldnsfs of imagery ; but, fomething more 

artificial 



6l Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 

artificial and elaborate ; fomething, which demanded 
more effort and ingenuity to form, than merely 
arofe from the effufions of a glowing heart ? 

** Is not, then, the proper and peculiar charac- 
terifcic of poetry, that metre or rhythm, which 
the ear fo eafily diftinguifhes, and with which it 
is fo unfpeakably delighted ? Is not this the great 
diflinclion between the modulation of poetry and 
profe ; that the one, is regular, determined by 
certain laws, and returning upon the ear at ftated 
periods; whilft the other, has no ftandard but the 
general fen/e of harmony, and is infinitely irregular 
and various? The imagery or fentiment is a 
mere circumftance, which does not conftitute, how- 
ever it may adorn, poetic compofition. We can 
fuppofe nonfenfe in profe. Can we not equally 
fuppofe nonfenfe in poetry ? And yet, fliall there 
not be an ejfential difference, between poetic and 
profaic jargon ? If fo, fomething elfe, befidcs 
the fentiment or fenfe, is the boundary between 
them. And what is this, but that metre or 
melody, without which, the language which 
conveys the loftieft fentiments may be indeed 
poetical, but can never be, poetry itself." 



I fliall not pretend to decide, abfolutely, upon 
the ftrength or weaknefs of the foregoing argu- 
ments. I fhall be happy to hear them fully 

difcuffed 



Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 63 

difcufled in the enfuing converfation, from 
which I promife myfclf, both inftruction and 
entertainment. 

At prefent, I find rnyfelf difpofed to reft in 
fbme fuch general conclufion, as the following. 

To finished and perfect poetry, or rather 
to the highest order of poetic compofitions, 
are neceffary, elevation of fentiment, fire of ima- 
gination, and regularity of metre. This is the 
fummit of Parnassus. But, from this fublimefi 
point, there are gradual declinations, till you 
come to the region of profe. The lafi line of 
feparation is, that of regular metre. And, in 
common language, not having fettled with pre- 
cifion the nature or boundaries of either, we 
often apply the poetic character with great lati- 
tude, to compofitions, which have more or lefs 
of the preceding qualities, but which are formed 
into uniform and regular verfe. Often, the name 
is given to works, which have nothing to diftin- 
guifh them, but mere number* What has net 
this metrical modulation, we call poetical; and 
what has it, v we call profaic, folely upon account 
of the fentiment. For poetry and profe, like two 
colours, eafily diftinguifhable from each other 
in their pure, unmixed date, melt into one ano- 
ther by almoft imperceptible fhades, till the 
diftincTcion is entirely loft. Their general cha- 
racters are widely different. Their approximations 
admit of the neareft refemblances. 

With 



64 Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 

"With refpect to mere number, the difficulty is 
not great, in the prefent cultivated ftate of lan- 
guage, for any perfon, of a tolerable ear, to tag 
together lines, the mufic of which (hall be flow- 
ing and agreeable. Hence, the multitudes of 
indifferent poets, who abound amongfr. us ! But it 
has been juftly obferved, that a ftate of cultivated 
fociety is not favourable to thofe bolder exer- 
tions of poetic fancy, which elevate, aftonifh, 
and delight the mind. 

It has been often faid, as we have before re- 
marked, that the original ftile, both of hiftory and 
converfation, was poetical. The friends of this 
hypothefis mud mean no more, than that, in 
early ages, their language was, in general, bold 
and florid. And we have already obferved, that 
ftrong conceptions naturally clothe themfelves 
in figurative, and modulated expreffions. From 
Jlrong, to regular, the tranfition is not difficult; 
and the advantage would be great. Uniform 
metre would give more delight to the ear, by 
rendering the mufic more perfect j and it would 
be more eafily retained by the -memory. 

We may account for the formation of regular 
verfe, on another principle. This fame animated 
feeling, which prompted men to dance and fing y 
would alfo prompt them, to exprefs themfelves 
with energy of tone, oljlile, of/entiment. It would 
lead them to endeavour to adapt their language 
to their Jong, But, in order to this- union, it 

mult 



Br. Barnes on Poetry. 6$ 

.mult become meafured, and exa<5t. Hence, the 
early formation of ver/e, which, when once adopt- 
ed, would, for the reafons before mentioned, be 
immediately employed, to convey their laws, and 
hiftorics, to future ages. It differed but little 
from the common ftile of their orations. At 
lead, the difference was not to be compared with 
that, which is found in the more advanced pe- 
riods of fociety, and of language. 

We have already obferved, that, in the early 
ages of mankind, when their lives were filled 
with toils and dangers, and when new and in- 
terefting events were continually opening upon 
them, their pailions would correfpond to their 
fituation, and would be various, vehement, and 
aftive. Civilization and fcience have, as it were 
minced into finer portions, the feelings of the 
heart. By this means, we enjoy a far greater number 
of pleafurable fenfations, and, upon the whole, 
I doubt not, a much larger fum of happinefs. 
The life of an Indian confills, either of glare, or 
of darknefs. He is either tranfported with pafiion, 
or funk into ftupor. Thefe larger marTes have 
been broken, by the hand of culture, into fmaller 
pieces, which are in perpetual currency, and 
which maintain, among us, a more equal and 
conftant enjoyment. 

But, from hence it will follow, that the Jlrong 
poetic charatler may be expected to decline, as 
taste improves. We may, perhaps, hope to excel 
Vol. I. F in 



66 Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 

in foftnefs, delicacy, and refinement. But thefe 
are feeble graces. The mind foon tires, with the 
perpetual chime of fmooth verification, and 
with the unvaried flow of gentle and unimpaf- 
fioned fentiment. The burfts of honeft nature, 
the glow of animated feeling, the imagery, the 
enthufiafm — Thefe are the charming properties, 
which will for ever exalt the poems, in which 
they are found, to the firfi order of poetic ex- 
cellence. For thefe, no appendages of art can be 
deemed an adequate compenfation. 

A writer, whom I cannot mention without 
great refpecl, notwithftanding our difference 
of opinion upon fome interefting fubjecls, 
feems not to have fettled accurately his own 
idea of poetic efTence. Dr. Johnfon, many of 
whofe criticifms upon the Englifh Poets in- 
dicate the ftrength of judgment, and fome, the 
elegance of tafte, fays, in his life of Milton, 
" Poetry is the art of uniting pleafure with truth, 
by calling imagination to the aid of reafon." He 
then mentions the different fciences, of which the 
Poet fhould be a mafter; hiftory, morality, 
policy, the knowledge of the pafiions, phyfiology. 
" To put thefe materials to poetical ufe, is re- 
quired, an imagination capable of painting nature* 
and realizing ficlion. Nor can he yet be a Poet, till 
he has obtained the whole expanfion of his lan- 
guage, diftinguifhed all the delicacies of phrafe, 
and all the colours of words 3 and learned to adjufl: 

all 



Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 6y 

all thefe different founds, to all the variety of 
metrical modulation." In thefe laft words, 
metrical modulation is fuppofed to be a neceffary 
adjunct to knowledge, and imagination. In 
another place, he fays, " It is by the mufic of 
metre, that poetry has been difcriminated, in 
all languages." And yet he had juft before faid, 
" That, perhaps, of poetry, as a mental operation, 
metre or mufic is no neceffary adjunct." I am unwil- 
ling to draw any other inference from thefe paf- 
fages, than this, that, fuch is the difficulty of 
fettling with precifion the poetic effence, even 
Dr. Johnson is inaccurate, and inconfiftent. 

If, in order to avoid this charge, it be faid, 
that a diftinction is made, between poetry, as a 
menial operation, and poetry, as an aclual expref- 
fion of the thoughts in language, then it will 
follow, that a perfon may be a mental Poet, with- 
out being a. practical one; becaufe he may polfefs 
imagination, feeling, &c. without being able to 
exprefs thefe mental operations, in a proper 
manner. He may have poetical ideas, but not 
poetical jlile. And, exactly in the fame fenfe, a 
man might be an orator, or a painter, without 
being able to/peak in public, or to ufe the pencil, 

I beg leave to finifh the fubjecl:, by a few 
obfervations on modulation of language, which, 
have fuggefted themfelves, in the courfe of the 
foregoing Ipeculations. 

F 2 Different 



63 Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 

Different languages vary, exceeding widely, 
in their capability of modulation ; and, from this 
caufe, will vary as much, in the mode and cha- 
racter of their rhythm, or mufical compofition. 
Every good and rounded ftile, in profe, as well 
as in poetry, has a metre, or mufic, which the ear, 
when at all refined by clafilcal tafte, can imme- 
diately/^/, and enjoy. There is, in finifhed com- 
pofition as much of melody and fweetnefs, in 
the arrangement of projaic fyllables, as in the 
mod poetical. The ear as nicely difcriminates 
the foft, the plaintive, the bold, the nervous, 
the elegant, by the flow of mufical exprejfion, as 
in the moft exact and perfect poem. From this 
circumftance alone, we are able, at once, to dif- 
tin^uifh the ftile of Addison, and Sherlock, 
of Tillotson and Watts, and Young. We 
diftinguifh them, as eafily, as a connoifTeur in 
mufic y who feels, at once, the compofitions of 
Handel, and thofe of Corelli. 

It is probable, the ears of the antient Romans 
and Grecians were more nicely tuned, to dif- 
ccrn the melody of arrangement, and of cadence, 
than ours. Or, probably, we have loft that 
"tune," or mode of 'pronunciation, in which 
their languages were fpoken •, for a modern ear 
cannot feel that richnefs and harmony of numbers, 
which appears to have been, to them, fo inex- 
preflibly delightful. " Cicero tells us, that he 
was himfelf a witnefs of its influence, as Carbo 

was 



Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 69 

was once haranguing the people. When that 
Orator pronounced the following fentence; ' Pa- 
tris dictum fapiens temeritas filii comprobavit,' 
it was aflonifhing, fays he, to obferve the gene- 
ral applaufe, which followed that harmonious clofe. 
And he tells us, that, if the final meafure had 
been changed, and the words placed in a different 
order, their whole effect would have been abfo- 
hitcly deftroyed." 

This muficalntfs, and flow of numerous com- 
pofition, which charms the ear of every judicious 
reader, is certainly felt mod ftrongly, when it 
is read aloud, with tafte and expreffion. But 
when read 'with the eye on!y y without the accom- 
paniment of the voice, there is a fainter ajfociaticn 
of the found, the Jhadow of the mii/ic, as it were, con- 
nected with the words; fo that, we can judge as 
exactly of the compofition, as if were audible 
to the ear. This power, of alTociating/c«^with 
V : Jton t is formed gradually by habit; for com- 
mon people, who are not much accuftomed to 
books, hardly underfcand any thing they, read, 
unlefs it be accompanied with the voice. And 
fome Gentlemen are faid to have acquired this 
art of mental combination fo perfectly, as to 
ready even the notes of a mufical compofition, 
with conquerable preafure. 

The difference of modulation in languages, 
muft give a different character and expreffion 
to their poetic compofitions. The Grecian and 

F 3 Roman 



yo Dr. barnes 6n Poetry. 

Koman tongues were fo happily conftrUcted, 
that their verfe eafily diffinguifhed itfelf by its 
arrangement, and therefore needed no fecondary 
or artificial aid. It has been thought, that our 
Englifh tongue is not equally happy ; and that, 
therefore, rhyme is, in general, neceffary to make 
the difcrimination per feci, and to give that chime 
or mufic to the ear, which the fuccetfion of long 
and fhort fyllables alone, could not effect. The 
fact adduced in fupport of this obfervaiion by 
Dr. Johnfon, * is certainly true -, " that very few- 
poems, in blank verfe, have long maintained 
a character among us. Thomfon, and above 
all, Milton, are great exceptions, but their ftile is 
fingular. They formed therrifelves upon no 
model ; and are originals which we may admire, 
but ought not to attempt to copy." 

This remark, though, perhaps, in fome degree 
juft, is, however, degrading. And, if the tag 
of rhyme be, in general, neceffary to our Englifh 
poetry, it will be an additional argument in 
favour of that hypothefis, which luppofes metre 
to be the grand criterion of poetic diction. 

Yet, mcthinks, the Doctor is too fevere, when he 
fays, " The variety of paufes, fo much boafted of 
by the lovers of blank verfe, changes the meafures 
of an Englifh Poet, into the periods of a declaimer. ,% 
To me, there appears a very effential difference, 

* Life of Milton. 

between 



Dr. Barnes on Poetry. 71 

between the paufes of verfe, and thofe of mere 
declamation. The poetry of Milton has been 
celebrated by the bed judges, as inimitably 
beautiful and harmonious, from the amazing 
variety, and judicious changes, of the paufe. 
Thefe are fo admirably difpofed, that the 
ear hardly ever tires. There is none of that 
perpetual famenefs, and recurrence of found, 
which, in common blank verfe, is fo in- 
fufFerably difgufting. Surely, the verfe of 
Milton is not, " verfe only to the eye.'" I cannot, 
therefore, fubfcribe to Dr. Johnfon's fentiment, 
" that all the power of Milton's poetry confifts, 
in the fublimity of his fentiment, or the peculiar 
(he elfewhere calls it ' perverfe and pedantic') 
arrangement of his ftile." His fentiments are, 
indeed, lofty and noble. But his metre alfo is 
inexpreffibly rich, mellow, and harmonious. 
Whichever hypothefis, therefore, , we adopt, as 
to the conftituent character of poetry, that of 
Milton will have every praife, — of sentiment,— 

Of IMAGERY, — of MODULATION. 



F 4 On 



72 Dr. Barnes on the Affinity 



On the Affinity fubfijling between the Arts, with 
a Plan for promoting and extending Manufac- 
tures, by encouraging those Arts, onwhich 
Manufactures principally depend. By Thomas 
Barnes, P. D. Read January 9, 1782. 



" Omnes Aites, qua: ad Humanitatem pertinent, ha- 
bent quoddam commune vinculum, et quad cognatione 
quadam inter fe continentur. 

Cicero pro Archia Poeta. 



IT is a queftion, not only of fpeculation, but 
of real importance, <r How far is it defirable, 
that a man of learning {hall devote himfelf to 
one particular object ?" Or, to put it in a dif- 
ferent form, <c Will not the interefts of science 
be bed promoted, by a more 'general and extended 
application to different ftudies ?" 

In the life of Dr. Isaac Barrow, we are told, 
that great man " entered upon ftudies of dif- 
ferent kinds, whereby he could not totally devote 
himfelf to one, which would have been more 
for the public benefit, according to his own 
opinion, which was j that general fcholars did 
more pleafe tbemf elves ; but that they, who pro- 
fecuted particular fubjecls, did more pleafe 
others." 

Whatever 



fubjifting between the Arts. 72 

. "Whatever truth there may appear to be in this 
fentiment, in fome uncommon inftances, I per- 
fuade myfelf, it will not, in general, accord with 
experience. Though every man fhould have 
fome one object continually in view, to which 
he fhould refer all his knowledge, and by which 
he fhould direct all his ftudies; yet, with this 
aim, let him rove abroad, through the various 
walks of literature. He will, probably, meet 
wjth many things, which he will now apply, 
with great advantage, to his main fubject, and by 
which he may illuftrate, embellifh, or extend it. 
General Science, with this particular application, 
collects the fcattered rays, reflected from a thou- 
fand objecls, into one focus, and blends all the 
variegated colours of the rainbow, into one 
white, and luminous point. Whatever praife 
may, in particular cafes, have been given to the 
man, who has travelled only in one path of Science, 
his ideas muft neceffarily be very confined, and 
he will, probably, fall under the charge of 
pedantry, and affectation. The Sciences are 
filters, affectionate filters ! and, as the Roman 
Orator, in our motto, has beautifully exprefTed 
it, " Quafi cognatione quadam inter fe continen- 
tur." To be in the good graces of any one of 
them, you muft pay fome refpectful attention to 
the reft. 

General knowledge, like the general motion 
of the various limbs of the body, gives an agility 

and 



74 Dr- Barnes on the Affinity 

and vigour to every part of the mental frame. 
The continual, folitary play of one particular 
limb, may give ftrength and dexterity to the 
mufcles connected with that limb ; but the pro- 
bable confequence will be, awkwardnefs and 
imbecility in all thofe, which are not brought into 
action. The mere mathematician, the mere 
grammarian, or the mere any thing, may, perhaps, 
with microfcopic eye, fee one little objeft very 
diftinclly. But, if not accuftomed to look 
around him to a wider range of vifion, his view 
will be narrow, and, when he turns from that 
lucid point, he will be enveloped with darknefs. 
It is, indeed, impofilble for the man, whofe 
mind has not been expanded by fome love of 
general knowledge, to appreciate the feveral 
fciences, according to their juft value, and to 
affign to each their proportionable fhare of efteem 
and confequence. If Monfieur Veftris com- 
prife all human excellence in dancing: if 
another man look down, with fupreme contempt, 
upon every perfon, who has not plunged into 
the depths of mathematical, or metaphyfical myf- 
teries, what is the caufe ? Is it not, the want of 
fome acquaintance with other fciences? This 
would have enabled him, to range the different 
branches of knowledge in their proper order, 
and to apportion to each, their proper fhare of 
attention and regard. 

But 



Jnhf.jVtr.g between the Arts. 75 

But we may advance a ftep further. The 
man of one book, is nol likely to v.nderftand 
that one book, fo well, as the man of more ex- 
tended ftudy. There is a general analogy and 
affinity, among all the fcienees. In all thofe 
which require cultivated imagination, or im- 
proved tafte, general knowledge is abfolutely 
necefiary. To form elegance of mind, there 
muft be, a comparifon of ideas, a combination 
of images, an extenfion of foul. Hence arife, 
the fenfe of fymmetry, elevation of fentiment, and 
a capacity to relifh the beautiful, and the fub- 
lime. 

The more abftrufe fcienees may feem to 
require kfs y of foreign and adventitious aid. 
The metaphyfician may, like a mole, work 
under ground, blindfold. Buried, ten thoufand 
fathoms deep, beneath the furface, he may need 
little the taper of the other fcienees. And yet, 
the fact has often been, and experience confirms 
it, in many inftances, at this day, that thofe, who 
have excelled moft, even in the abftrujer parts 
of literature, have been men of a large acquaint- 
ance with knowledge. And, in general, thofe 
who have (hone with uncommon fplendor, in 
fome one profeffional, or favourite fcience, have 
been diftinguifhed by an attachment to know- 
ledge, in all its branches. Newton was not the 
mere aftronomer, or calculator. Boyle was not, 
merely, the natural philofopher; nor was Locke, 

the 



76 Dr. Barnes on the Affinity 

the mere metaphyfician. They had occafionally 
wandered into the other walks of fcience, and had 
brought from thence treafures, to enrich their 
favourite fbores. To thefe, how many names 
might be added ? Barrow, Hailer, Watts — 
and one, whofe name I cannot mention, without 
ftrong and grateful fenfations-. — the late Dr. 
Aikin, than whom few have had mental trea- 
fures, more various, or more valuable *. 

It is in general faid, that the knowledge, 
which, like the broad ftream, flows over a wider 
furface, muft be proportionably fhallow ; whilft 
that which runs in the narrow channel, muft be 
deep. But we are deceived by an image. We 
argue from a fancied refemblance. The mind, 
long poring upon one object, grows tired, and 
feeble. It is necefTary, fometimes, to change 
the object, in order to reftore its tone and vigour. 
He, who can thus diverfify his purfuits, keeps 
up the fpring and energy of his powers, the 

* John Aikin, D.D. was Tutor in Divinity at the 
Academy at Warrington for feveral years. Though .not 
known to the world at large as an author, his modefty 
having unhappily prevented him from appearing in print, 
he was uncommonly revered by all that knew him, for the 
wonderful extent of his knowledge, for the mild dignity 
of his character, and for the various excellencies which 
adorned the Scholar, the Tutor, and the Man. He was 
the father of Mrs. Barbauld, and of John Aikin, M. D. 
both of whom are well known in the Republic of Letters. 

ardour 



fub/ijiing between the Arts 77 

ardour of his ftudies, the keennefs of his refearch. 
He borrows ideas, images, illustrations, from 
kindred fciences. His mind widens with in- 
creasing knowledge. He fees every fubject, as 
it were, in a larger field of vifion. He views it 
round, in a greater variety of afpects. His foul 
is expanded, his judgment strengthened, and all 
his powers afiifted, and improved. 

But I meant, principally, to extend this fenti- 
ment to the arts. Though they too have a near 
affinity, yet it is not generally imagined, that, 
to excel in one art, it is proper a man (hould 
have any knowledge of others ; efpecially of thofe, 
which appear more remote and unconnected. 
That a poet (hould be a painter, or a painter a 
poet, may feem defirable, from the fimilarity of 
tafte, of genius, and of imagination, necefTary 
to excellence in thefe kindred arts. But, in the 
lower, and mechanic employments, how feldom 
is it known, that a man, verfed in one kind of 
ingenious labour, has the mod: distant knowledge 
of others, even of thofe, which feem mod nearly 
connected with his own ? How many watch- 
makers know very little of clock making} though, 
here, the connection is as clofe as pofilble ? 
How many machines are ufed at Birmingham, 
in the different branches of manufacture carried 
on there, of which a mechanic at Manchester, 
even in the fame line, is entirely ignorant ? There 
are, it is probable, in every m-anufafture, I had 

almoft 



78 Dr. Barnes on the Affinity. 

almoft faid, in every place, fome peculiar, and 
local improvement, which has never yet been 
extended, beyond the vicinity, where it was firft 
invented? Of late, indeed, the fpirit of enter- 
prize has gone forth, and the inventions, made 
in one manufacture, have been fometimes tranf- 
ferred to others. The machines for fpinning 
cotton, have been applied to woollen, and with 
great advantage. And, probably, both have 
been under great obligations to thofe curious 
machines, for twilling and manufacturing filk, 
which have fo long excited general curiofity, 
and admiration. 

So great is the analogy between the feveral arts, 
that no man knows, to what extent the improve- 
ment of any fingle art may affect others, even 
where the relation, at ftrft fight, appears moft 
diftant. Who would have imagined, that the 
difcovery of the properties of the magnetic needle, 
would have ,had fuch amazing, and almoft infinite 
effects ? That, by this property alone, navigation 
fliould become fo aftonifhingly. extended, new 
continents be difcovered, and a new ^er a opened, 
in the hiftory of the globe ! I was, a few days 
ago, greatly pleafed with tracing the progrefs of 
an invention, into feveral branches of art, with 
which, at firft, it appeared, not to have the mod 
remote affinity. I refer to the Cylinder, covered 
with wire-cloth, of different finenefs, originally 
intended only for fifting flour, meal, and bran, 

immediately 



Juhfijling between the Arts. 7 9 

immediately as they come from the mill- (tone. 
For this ingenious invention, Mr. Mills got a 
patent, the term of which is now, probably, 
expired ; for the perfon who Ihewed it me, 
informed me, that he had himfelf applied the 
Cylinder, with little variation, in biting gunpowder, 
Jnuff, tanners' bark, and fand. So that, by this 
fnnple, but beautiful difcovery, the dealers in all 
thofe various articles have reaped already con- 
fiderable advantage : and how far the advantage 
may JIM be extended, is as yet unknown. The 
power of Steam, in producing effe&s, to which 
hardly any powers of mechanifm are equal, has 
been long obferved, in the Fire-Engines, in the 
conftruction and application of which, Philofophy 
has lent her aid to Art^ and Science has become 
the tutor, and guide of Genius. But we have 
not heard, till lately, that this a£Hve and potent 
principle has been applied, in any other inftances; 
though there are many, in which a principle fo 
powerful, and, it is prefumed, fo manageable, 
would be of unfpeakable advantage. The exten- 
fion of it to machines, for /pinning cotton, and for 
grinding com, is now, I am informed, under the 
contemplation of different Artifts ; and, if cir- 
cumftances favour the execution, will, probably, 
be accomplished. * 

* A machine fcr fpinning cotton has now been worked, 
for fome time, upon this principle, at Manchefter. And 
the other, for grinding corn, is faid to be in confiderable 
fonvardnefs, near Black-fryars bridge, London. 

That 



go "Dr. Barnes on the Affinity 

That our manufactures, at prefent, depend 
very much upon our machines : that the Cot- 
ton Manufacture, in particular, is, under Pro- 
vidence, entirely dependent upon them: and, 
that their utmojl improvement, to the very higheft 
point, to which it is poflible for them to arrive, 
is, in the prefent circumftances of trade, very, 
defirable, for the fake of every intereft, and of 
every order of men, dependent upon our manu- 
factures, I will not here attempt to prove. 
They are pofnions, denied by none, but the 
loweft and weakeft of the vulgar; where alone 
fuch weaknefs is pardonable. Whatever, therefore, 
may tend to encourage and aflift thofe arts, by 
which mechanifm may be improved, and our 
manufactures extended, is a matter of common 
utility and importance. The Clergyman, the 
Phyfician, the Gentleman, are, I had almoft 
faid, equally interefted with the Tradefman, and 
the Merchant. 

To anfwer, in fome degree, this important 
end, and to ferve, however feebly, this general 
interest, I have imagined to myfclf a plan, 
which appeared to me, not impoffible to be 
carried into execution, and important enough to 
be attempted. It may, poflibly, appear to fome 
Gentlemen, an Utopian fcheme. Many objections 
may, at firft fight, appear to rife againft it. But 
I have all the confidence of a Projector, in faying, 
that I firmly believe, with proper attention, fuch 

as 



Jubjifting between the Arts 81 

as has been paid to other defigns of public utility, 
it might be executed ; and, if executed, muft be 
of public advantage j an advantage, which no 
man can eltimate at prefent, and the full extent 
of which, perhaps, no man could conjecture. 

Before I ftate this plan, I will beg leave to 
make two obfervations, in addition to what has 
been already faid, on the fubject of improve- 
ments in our manufactures. And, firfr, 

It is now more neceflfary than ever, that our 
artifls and workmen, in the different branches, 
ftiall be poffeiTed of fome degree of to.fie. And 
tafte is only to be acquired by that general and 
mifcellaneous knowledge, which it has been the 
object of this paper to recommend. Our manu- 
factures mufl now have, not merely, that ftrength 
of fabric, and that durability of texture, in which 
once confided their higheft praife. They muft 
hav^ elegance of defign, novelty of pattern, and 
beauty of finijhhg. To effect thefe, all the aid 
of improved and refined art is effentially necef- 
fary. The dull plodder, accuftomed to pace 
round and round, like a mill-horfe, is not likely 
to ft r ike out any thing new, and elegant. He 
may, indeed, adopt the improvements of others : 
but his will never be the praife, of ferving his 
fei low-creatures, by any inventions, of real im- 
portance, and utility. 

I would further obferve, that, in the prefent 
(late of the Arts, capital improvements are not 

Vol. I. G to 



82 Dr. Barnes on the Affinity 

to be, in general, expeded from thofe, who 
would, at firft fight, appear moft likely to make 
them ; I mean, the workmen in different branches 
of mechanifm. Turn your eyes to any of our 
numerous manufactures. You find every divifion 
of mechanical labour, executed by a feparate 
fet of workmen. Dr. Smith, in his Wealth of 
Nations, tells us, « that a Pin goes through 
eighteen feveral diftinft operations," each of 
which, probably, in a large concern, is per- 
formed by a different operator, who, it may be 
prefumed, would feel himfelf very awkward and 
unready, if obliged to change employment with 
any other of his fellow workmen. How many 
hands concur, in the formation of a Watch, but 
very few of whom are fo well acquainted'with 
the 'whole mechanifm, as to be able to put the 
W r atch together, or to calculate the different 
wheels, of which it is compofed. 

I imagine it to be owing to this circumftance, 
that improvements, upon a larger Jcale, fuch as 
the invention of great and complicated machines, 
&c. have generally been made, by peribns, not] 
originally educated to the profeffion of thofe arts, 
in which they have made fuch aftonilhing tfif- 
coveries. Whilft the regular artifts have had 
their attention fixed upon the little points, and 
ramifications of art, in which indeed they have 
become aftonifhingly perfect, the others, (landing 
more at a dittance, have had a wider field, a 

nobler 



Jubfifting between the Arts. • 83 

nobler object in their view, at once. Hence, 
their minds have been extended to a complex 
•whole, the fir ft faint outline of which, they have, 
by flow degrees of patient labour, finifhed into 
form and beauty. Hence, almoft all our late 
machines have been invented, in a part of the 
country, where the ftate of the Arts is not greatly 
improved, and where original genius is not 
minced down, to the fhreds and atoms of a long- 
eftablifhed, and widely- extended manufacture. 

It is acknowledged, that mere random genius 
has made aftonifhing difcoveries ar.d improve- 
ments, without any aid, but that of native faga- 
city. But, on the other hand, how many minds, 
capable, with affiftance and encouragement, of 
producing the happieft inventions, have, for 
want of them, pined in obfeurity, loft to the 
world, and incapable of any great atchievement ? 
And, we may afk, what might fuch genius have 
atchieved, if foftered by fcience, by liberality, 
and by honour!* What Erindley executed by 

* But knowledge to their eye, her ample page, 
Rich with the Ipoils of time, did ne'er unroll; 
Chill penury rcprefTed their noble rage, 
And froze the genial current of their foul. 

Full many a gem, of pureft ray ferene, 
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear; 
Full many a flower is born to blufh, unfeen, 
And walle its fweetnefs on the defarc air. 

Gray's Church Yard. 

G 2 the 



84 Dr. Barnes on the Affinity 

the mere dint of natural parts, is no exception 
to the rule. How much more might even he 
have done, if affifted by a more extenfive know- 
ledge, and a more liberal education ! What, 
if to genius and application had been added, a 
larger field of obfervation, a more general ac- 
quaintance with the mechanical powers, and 
with what thofe powers have already done, in 
the various branches of Manufactures, and of 
Arts ! How much further might he have ad- 
vanced ! That human ingenuity is not exhauft- 
ed ; that machines are not yet carried to their 
higheft improvement, and that they ought to 
be encouraged to their very utmofi: exertions, 
none here will queftion. 

Let us now apply thefe obfervations. I have 
ventured to chalk out the outlines of a plan, 
the fole object and principle of which is, the 
improvement of our Manufaftures, by the im- 
provement of thofe Arts, on "which they depend. 
Thofe arts are, chemistry and mechanism. 
In an excellent paper, read to this fociety fome 
time ago, it was lamented, " that fo few of our 
dyers are chemifts, and of our chemifts dyers." 
We may add, How few of our Mechanics under- 
ftand the principles of their own arcs, and the 
difcoveries made in other collateral and kindred 
manufactures ? At this day, I am informed, 
not a fingle weaver in the Norwich trade under- 
ftands the ufe of a Fly-Shuttle. 

But 



Jubfifiing between the Arts. 85 

But to proceed to our Flan. 
The firft object of this fcheme is — To provide 
a public repository among us for CHEMICAL 

and MECHANIC KNOWLEDGE. 

" In order to this, I could vvifh models to be 
procured, of all fuch machines, in the various 
arts, as feem to bear the moft diftant relation 
to our own manufactures. All the procefTes in 
thofe of Silk, of Woollen, of Linen, and of 
Cotton, fhould be here delineated. Thefe would 
make the moft neceflary, and important parts 
of this collection. But to thefe might, with 
great advantage, be added, the altonifhing 
effects of Mechanic Genius in other branches, 
which have not fo apparent an affinity with our 
own. 

" In this repository, let there be, likewife, 
provided, an aflbrtment of the feveral ingredients 
ufed in dying, printing, &c. for the purpofe 
of experiments. 

" A superintendant will be neceflary, to 
arrange, and to apply this collection to its proper 
ufe. He fhould be a man, well verfed in che- 
mical, and mechanic knowledge. And let his 
province be, at certain feafons, and under certain 
regulations, to give lectures, advice, and aj- 
ftfiance, to thofe who wifh to obtain a better 
knowledge of thefe arts. 

" Laftly; let the expence, neceflary to open, and 
to fupport the fcheme, be defrayed by z/ubfcrip- 

G 3 tion: 



86 Dr. Barnes on the Affinity 

tier.: and let every fubferiber have the power of 
nominating^, ox more, to receive the advantages 
of this Inftitudon." 

I mean only to draw the rudeft outline of the 
plan, and would leave it to the enfuing con- 
vention to be filled up, with colouring, or made. 
By this fcheme, properly methodized and con- 
dueled, I fhould hope for /me of the following 
advantages. 

This mechanic school would properly finifh 
the education of a young Tradefman, or Manu- 
facturer. It would fucceed, in its natural order, to 
the fchool for writing, and arithmetic. It would 
ferve as a proper ftep of tranfition, from thence 
to the warehoufe j and, perhaps, it might become 
a regular part of a young Gentleman's preparation 
for bufinefs. How defirable a part it would 
be, I will not here fay. Other Gentlemen prefent 
are much better qualified to decide upon the • 
queftion. 

But the principal advantage I mould propofe 
from this fcheme, is this. Here would be a 
kind of general oracle, which thofe might 
confult, who were engaged in mechanical im- 
provements, and who might here, at once, gain 
that information, which it might coft them 
months and years to obtain, by their own un- 
affifted efforts. 

It would be very eafy to enlarge, in theory, 
upon the poflible, and probable benefits of this 

Institution. 



fulfilling let-ween the Arts. tj 

Inftitution. But I check myfelf, hoping to 
hear, from Gentlemen more converfant with 
manufactures, their fenfe of this, it may be, 
vifionary fcheme. 

Objections will, perhaps, have already arifen, 
which may appear ftrong: I hope not unanfwer- 
able. That of the expence, 1 cannot allow to be of 
this number. Nor the difficulty of finding a pro- 
per per/on, to fuperintend the Institution. Nor the 
regulations, neceflary to its internal management 
and conduct. If no objections, ftronger than 
thefe, be found againft it", I fhall not deem it 
altogether Utopian. 

Something fimilar to this has been done, by 
the society of arts, But the two plans are efifen- 
tially different. They give premiums: but they 
have no lectures, or modes of lnftruction. 
Our plan would be defirable, in every large 
town, and particularly, in the center of every 
imoortant manufacture. 



¦hmp * 



"Whilft I was engaged in thinking upon this 
plan, and, like the Artift, enamoured wich its 
imaginary beauty, I met with the following 
paflage in Sully's Memoirs. My feelings, in 
reading it, I will not attempt to defcribe. 

He tells us, that, among the great defigns of 
Henry IV. which were prevented from being 
carried into execution, by the untimely and 

G 4 tragical 



83 Dr. Barnes on the Affinity, &c. 

tragical death of that Great Prince, was the 
following : 

" There was to be, fays he, a cabinet of 
state, in the Louvre, deftined to receive, 
whatever could tend to the knowledge of Finance, 
of Science, and of Art" After enumerating feveral 
of thefe, particularly relating to the army, fuch 
as lifts, plans, charts, Sec. &c. he adds, £< I con- 
ceived a fcheme, of appointing a large room, 
as a magazine of models, of whatever is moft 
curious in machinery, relating to war, arts, 
trade, &c. and all forts of exercifes, noble, 
liberal, and mechanical; that all thofe, who 
afpired to perfection, might, without trouble, 
improve themfelves in this filent fchool. The 
lower apartments, were to hold the heavy pieces 
of workmanihip ; and the higher, were to con- 
tain the lighter. An exact inventory of both, 
was to be one of the pieces of the great cabinet." * 

What a pity is it, that this noble plan was not 
carried into execution! It would not have been the 
leajl of the embellishments of the reign of Henry. 
It would have done honour to the Prince, and to 
the age. f I mean not to difparage the utility of 
our modern collections, of fojjils, Jhells, mojfes, 
and injecls. They are the works of God j and, 

* Sully's Memoirs, Vol. IV. 

f I have been informed, that this plan is fince carried 
into execution, in the Palais Royal. 

therefore, 



Dr. Aikin on preferring Health, &c. 89 

therefore, worthy of our higheft admiration. 
But I can eafily conceive, that a fcheme like 
this, upon a fmaller fcale, might poftibly be 
applied to better ufe, than many of thofe collec- 
tions actually ferve. In a town like this, the 
opulence, and even the very exiftence of which, 
depends upon manufactures, and thefe again 
upon arts, machinery, and invention, a public 
cabinet, devoted to this purpofe, would be 
at-once of general ornament, and utility. 



Remarks on the different Success, with re/peel to 
Health, ofjome Attempts to pafs the Winter 
in high Northern Latitudes. By John 
Aikin, M. D. Read January 16, 1782. 

HP HOUGH the cure of difeafes may, perhaps, 
-*- mod fafely be confined to the members of 
a profefTion devoted by education and habit to 
this fole object, yet the prefervation of health muft, 
in fome meafure, be committed to the care and 
judgment of every individual. The difcuflion, 
therefore, of any means to obtain this end, di- 
verted, as it may be, of technical language and 
abftrufe fpeculation, cannot fail of being gene- 
rally 



go Dr. Aikin on preferving Health. 

rally interesting. The mod remarkable and 
ufeful account of fuccefs in this important point, 
perhaps any where to be met with, has been 
afforded by that celebrated and much-regretted 
navigator Captain Cook ; an account which 
was juflly thought worthy of the mod honour- 
able approbation a Philofophical Society could 
bellow. From fimilar fources, relations of 
voyages and travels by plain, unprejudiced men, 
1 have collected fome other facts, probably at 
prefent forgotten or difregarded, which appear 
to me capable of fuggefling feveral ftriking and 
important obfervations relative to the prefer- 
vation of health in particular circumftances. 
Thefe with a brief commentary and fome gene- 
ral reflections, I beg leave to fubmit to your 
confideration. 

Towards the beginning of the laft century, 
feveral voyages of difcovery were made in the 
Northern Seas ; and the Greenland whale-fifliery 
began to be purfued with ardour by various 
European nations. Thefe two circumftances 
have given rife to various inftances of wintering 
in the dreary and defolate lands of high northern 
latitudes; and the furprizing difference of fuc- 
cefs attending thefe attempts mud ftrike every 
reader. 

The firft remarkable relation of this kind 
that I have found, is that of the wintering of 
Captain Mo.ick, a Dane, in Hudfon's Bay, 

latitude 



in high Northern Latitudes. $'i 

latitude 63°. 20'. He had been fent on a voyage 
of difcovery with two (hips, well provided with 
neceffaries, the crews of which amounted to 
fixty four perfons. The fliips being locked up 
in the ice, they landed, and erected huts for 
palling the winter, which they occupied in 
September, 1619. At the beginning of their 
abode here, they got abundance of wild-fowl, 
and fome other frefli provifion ; but the cold 
foon became fo intenfe, that nothing further was 
to be procured abroad, and they were obliged 
to take to their {hip-ftores. The fe verity of 
the cold may be conceived, from their feeing 
ice three hundred and fixty feet thick ; and from 
their beer, wine, and brandy being all frozen to 
the very centre. The people foon began to be 
fickly, and their ficknefs increafcd with the cold. 
Some were affected by gripes and loofenefs, which 
continued till they died. At the approach of 
fpring, they were all highly fcorbutic, and their 
mouths were fo extremely fore, that they were 
unable to eat any thing but bread foaked in 
water. At lad, their bread was exhaufted -, and 
the few furvivors chiefly fubfifted on a kind of 
berry dug out from beneath the fnow. When 
the fpring was far advanced, no frelh vegetables 
could yet be found. In June, the Captain 
crawled out of his hut, and found the whole 
company reduced to two men befides himfelf. Thefe 
melancholy Telifts fupported themfelves in the 

bed 



9 2 Dr . A'tkin on ¦prefervlng Health 

beft manner they were able, and recovered their 
Strength by feeding on a certain root they dis- 
covered, and fome game caught in hunting. At 
length they embarked in the fmaller fhip, and 
after undergoing numberlefs dangers and hard- 
ships, returned home in fafety. 

In the fame immenfe bay, but as far fouth as 
lat. 52, Captain James, an Englifhman, wintered 
with his crew. His refidence was on an ifland 
covered with wood ; but the cold was, notwith- 
standing, mod intenfe. In the depth of winter 
they were able to procure very little frefh provi- 
fion by the chace, and all became grievoufly 
afiU&ed with the fcurvy, except the Captain, 
Matter, and Surgeon. Weak and fick as they 
were, however, it was neceflary for them to 
labour hard out of doors during the greateft 
inclemency of the feafon j for, believing their 
fhip fo damaged, as to be incapable of carrying 
them home, they undertook the laborious talk 
of building a pinnace from the timber growing 
on the ifland. At the return of fpring, the 
young greens fprouted up much fooner and 
more plentifully here, than where Monck win- 
tered ; and it became very hot before they left 
the place. They loft only two men out of a 
crew of twenty-two. 

In the year 1633 two trials were made by the 
Dutch of ellablifning wintering-places at their 
northern fifheriesj the one at Spitzbergen, the 

other 



v 



in high Northern Latitudes. 93 

other on the coaft of Greenland, in latitudes 
about 77 or 78. Seven failors were left at each, 
amply furnifhed with every article of clothing, 
provifion, and utenfils thought necefiary or ufe- 
ful in fuch a fituation. The journals of both 
companies are preferved. 

That of the men in Greenland takes notice, 
that on September 18th the allowance of brandy 
beo-an to be ferved out to each perfon. On 
October 9th they began to make a conftant fire 
to fit by. About this time, it is remarked, that 
they experienced a confiderable change in their 
bodies, with giddinefs in their heads. They now 
and then killed a bear ; but their common diet 
was fait meat. In March they were all very ill 
of the fcurvyj and on April 16th the firft man 
died, and all the reft were entirely difabled, but 
one perfon. This poor wretch continues the 
journal to the laft day of April, when they were 
praying for a fpeedy releafe from their miferies. 
They were all found dead. 

The journal of thofe who were left at Spitz- 
bergen recites, that they fought in vain for green 
herbs, bears and foxes, in that defolate region ; 
and killed no other game than one fox, the 
whole time. The fcurvy appeared among them 
as early as November 24th ; and the firft man 
died January 14th. The journal ends February 
26th i and thefe too were all found dead. 

Not 



94 Dr* Aikin on preferring Health 

Not many years after thefe unfortunate at- 
tempts, an accident gave rife to an experiment, 
the event of which was fo entirely the reverfe of 
thefe, that it merits very particular notice. On 
the fame fide of Spitzbergen, between lat. 77 
and 78, a boat's crew, belonging to a Greenland 
fhip, confiding of eight Engliflimen, who had 
been fent alhore to kill deer, were left behind 
in confequence of fome miftakes, and reduced 
to the deplorable neceflity of wintering in that 
dreadful country, totally unprovided with every 
necelTary. From their narrative, drawn up in 
that ftyle of artlefs fimplicity which affords the 
ftrongeft prefumption of veracity, I (hall extract 
the mod material circumflances. 

At their wintering place was fortunately a 
large fubftantial wooden building, erected for 
the ufe of the coopers belonging to the fifhery. 
Within this they built a fmaller one, which they 
made very compact and warm. Here they con- 
frructed four cabins, with comfortable deer-fkin 
beds j and they kept up a continual fire, which 
never went out for eight months. They were 
tolerably fupplied with fuel from fome old cafks 
and boats which they broke up for the purpofe. 
Thus provided with lodging, their principal care 
was about their fubfiftence. Before the cold 
weather fet in, they killed a good number of 
deer, the greateft part of which they cut up, 
roalted, and flowed in barrels ; referving fome 

raw 



in high Northern Latitudes. 95 

raw for their Sundays' dinners. This, I imagine, 
mull have been frozen ; as it began to freeze 
fharply before they were fettled in their habi- 
tation. This venifon, with a few fea-horfes and 
bears which they killed from time to time, con- 
flicted their whole winter's provifion, except 
a very unfavoury article they were obliged to 
make out with, which was whale's fritters, or the 
fcraps of fat after the oil has been prefTed out. 
Thefe too, having been wetted and thrown in 
heaps, were mouldy. Their ufual courfe of diet, 
then, for the firft three months, was one meal 
of venifon every day in the week, except Wednef- 
days and Fridays, when they kept fail on whale's 
fritters. At the end of this period, on examin* 
ing their flock, they found it would not hold 
out at this rate, and therefore for the enfuing 
three months they retrenched their venifon meals' 
to three days in the week, and appeafed their 
hunger, as well as they could, on the other four 
days, upon the mouldy fritters. At the approach 
of fpring they had the good fortune to kill 
feveral white bears, which proved excellent foodf 
and, together with wild fowl and foxes which 
they caught, rendered it unneceffary any longer 
to Mint themfelves to fo rigorous an allowance i 
fo that they eat two or three meals of frefh meat 
daily, and foon improved in flrength and vigour. 
Their only drink during this whole time, was 
running water procured from beneath the ice 

on 



9 6 Dr. Aikln on preferring Health 

on the beach, till January; and afterwards, 
fnow-water melted by hot irons. The cold in 
the midft of winter was extreme. It raifed blis- 
ters in the fleffi ; and when they went abroad, 
they became fore all over, as if beaten. Iron, 
on being touched, ftuck to their fingers, like 
bird-lime. The melancholy of their Situation 
was aggravated by the abfence of the fun from 
the horizon, from Odtober 14th, to February ;,d, 
of which period, twenty days were pafTed in total 
darknefs, except the light of lamps, which they 
continued to keep continually burning. With 
all this, it does not appear that any of them were 
affetted with the fcurvy, or any other diforder; 
and the degree of weaknefs, which feems im- 
plied by the mention of their recovering ftrengch 
in the fpring, may be Sufficiently accounted for, 
merely from their Ihort allowance of nutritious 
food. At the return of the fhips on May 25th, 
they all appear to have been in health ; and all 
of them returned in Safety to their native country. 

The laft relation I fhall adduce, is one of 
late date, considerably reSembling the foregoing 
in feveral of its circumftances, but ftill more 
extraordinary. 

In the year 1743, a Ruffian Ship of Eaft 
Spitzbergen, in lat. between 77 and 78, was 
So encloied with ice, that the crew, apprehenfive 
of being obliged to winter there, fent four of 
their men in a boat, to feek for a hut, which 

they 



in high Northern Latitudes* 97 

they knew to have been erected near that coaft. 
The hut was difcovered ; but the men, on 
returning to the more, found all the ice cleared 
away, and the fhip no longer to be feen ; and 
indeed it was never more heard of. I pafs over 
their firft tranfports of grief and defpair, and 
alfo, their many ingenious contrivances to furnifh. 
themfelves with the neceffaries they ftood mod 
in need of. Their diet and way of life are the 
circumftances peculiarly connected with my 
fubject. After fitting up their hut as comfortably 
as they could, and laying in drift wood, collected 
on the fhore, for fuel, they turned their attention 
chiefly to the procuring of provifion. Three 
fpecies of animals, which they caught and killed 
by various devices, conftituted their whole 
variety of food. Thefe were, reindeer, white 
bears, and foxes. The flefh they eat almoft raw, 
and without fait j ufing, by way of bread to it, 
other flefh, dried hard in the fmoke. Their drink 
was running water in the Cummer, and melted 
ice and fnow in the winter. Their prefervatives 
againft the fcurvy were, fwallowing raw frozen 
meat broken into bits, drinking the warm blood 
of reindeer juft killed, eating fcurvy-grafs, when 
they could meet with it, and ufing much exer- 
cife. By thefe means three of them remained 
entirely free from this difeafe during the whole 
of their abode. The fourth died of it, after 
lingering on to the fixth year. It is remarked 
Vol. I. H that 



93 Dr. Aikin on preferring Health 

that this perfon was of an indolent difpofition, 
and could not conquer his averfion to drinking 
the reindeer's blood. The three furvivors, after 
remaining fix years and three months on this 
defolate and folitary ifland, were happily refcued 
by a (hip driven cafually upon the coaft, and 
returned home in fafety. They were ftrong and 
healthy at their return, but by habit had con- 
tracted an inability of eating bread, or drinking 
fpirituous liquors. 

To the above relations, I fhall add the follow- 
ing fhort quotations relative to the fame fubje<5t. 

In a note to the account of the four Ruffians, 
it is faid, " Counfellor Miiller fays, the Ruffians 
about Archangel fhould be imitated ; fome of 
whom every year winter in Nova Zembla without 
ever contracting the fcurvy. They follow the 
example of the Samoides, by frequently drinking 
the warm blood of reindeer juft killed. The 
hunting of thefe animals requires continual 
exercife. None ever keep their huts during the 
day, unlefs th\e ftormy weather, or too great 
quantity of fnow, hinders them from taking 
their ufual exercife." 

In a manufcript French account of the iflands 
lying between Kamtfchatka and America, drawn 
up by that eminent naturalift and geographer, 
Mr. Pallas, I find it mentioned, that "the 
Ruffians, '.n their hunting voyages to thefe iflands, 
(an expedition generally lafting three years) in 

order 



in high Northern Latitudes. ¦ 99 

order to fave expence and room in purchafing 
and flowing vegetable provifion, compofe half 
their crews of natives of Kamtfchatka, becaufe 
thefe people are able to preferve themfelves from 
the fcurvy with animal food only, by abftaining 
from the life of fait," 

Laftly, in the excellent oration of Linnseus, 
On the advantages of travelling in one's own country ', 
printed in the third volume of the Amanitates 
Academicx> it is afierted, " that the Laplanders 
live without corn and wine, without fait and 
every kind of artificial liquor, on water and 
flefh alone, and food prepared from them \ and 
yet are entirely free from the fcurvy." * 

Having thus ftated the facts which have fallen 
in my way relative to this fubjecl:, I proceed to 
a comparifon of their feveral circumftances, and 
fome remarks on the general refult. . 

The fcurvy appears to be the difeafe peculiarly 
dreaded and fatal in all the above-related attempts 
to winter in extremely cold climates. Whether 
the circumftance of cold itfelf, or the want of 
proper food, occafioned by it, principally con- 
duces to the generation of this difeafe, is a point 
not clearly afcertained. From the preceding 

* " In Lapplandia. obfervabit homines abfque Cerere & 
Baccho, abfque fale & potu omni artificiali, aqua tantum 
& came, & qua° ab his prceparantur, conrentos vivere. 

" Quare Norlandi, ut plurimum, fcorbuto fmt infe&i ; 8c 
cur Lappones, contra, hujus morbi prorfus expertes?" 

H 1 narrations, 



loo Dr. Aikin on preferving Health 

narrations, however, no doubt can be enter- 
tained, that it is poflible for perfons to keep free 
from the fcurvy, in countries and feafons the 
moft intenfely cold, provided their diet and 
manner of living be properly adapted to fuch 
fituations ; and this, without the aid of frefti 
vegetables, or any of thofe other prefervatives, 
which have of late been propofed by ingenious 
writers. 

When we compare the hiftories above recited, 
it is impofiible not to be immediately ftruck 
with thefe leading circumftances, that thofe in 
whom the fcurvy raged, fed upon fait provifions y 
and drank fpirituous liquors; whereas thofe who 
efcaped it, fed upon frejh animal food, or at 
lead preferved without fait, and drank water. 

It is well enough known among fea- faring 
people, that frefh animal food is ferviceable to 
fcorbutic perfons ; but whether the conftant ufe 
of it alone would prevent the fcurvy, they have no 
means of experiencing. As little can we learn 
from their experience, whether any other mode 
of preferving animal flefh than that of faking, 
will keep it in fuch a ftate as to be falubrious 
food. But the narrative of the eight Engiifhmen 
feems to determine both thefe important points ; 
for their provifion was all of the animal kind, 
and the greateft part of it was flelh, killed feveral 
months before, and kept from decaying, either 
by the coldnefs of the climate alone, or by the 

cooking 



in high Northern Latitudes. 101 

cooking it had undergone. It is evident, too, 
that the failors of Kamtfchatka, who fubfift 
during fo long a voyage on animal food unfalted, 
muft either preferve it by fmoking, freezing, or 
other fimilar procefTes, or mull ufe it in a putrid 
(late. To this laft, indeed, from the accounts 
we have of the ufual diet of thefe people, they 
feem not at all averfe > though we may find it 
difficult to conceive, how the body can be kept in 
health by food abfolutely putrefied. The Lap- 
landers, alfo, who fubfift fo entirely on animal 
food without fait, muft have other methods of 
preferving it for a considerable time j and, indeed 
it feems to be the conftant practice in Ruflia, and 
other northern regions, for the inhabitants to 
freeze their meat in order to lay it up for their 
winter's ftock. 

Thefe fads lead to the confideration of the 
queftion, whether faked meat be prejudicial, on 
account of the quantity of fait it contains j or, 
merely, becaufe the fait fails to preferve the 
juices of the fle(h in fuch a ftate, as to afford pro- 
per nutriment ? The latter, I believe, is the more 
prevalent opinion ; yet I confefs, I cannot but 
think, that fea-falt klelf, when taken in large 
quantities, muft prove unfriendly to the bc^y. 
The fcptic quality of /mall proportions of fait 
mixed with animal matters (and fmall proportions 
only can be received into the juices of a living 
finimal) has been proved by the well-known 

H 3 experiment^ 



102 Z>. Aikin on preferving Health 

experiments of Sir John Pringle. But befides 
this, it may prove hurtful, by the acrimonious and 
corrofive property with which it may impregnate 
the fluids. It is univerfally allowed, that much 
fak, and faked meats, are very prejudicial in the 
diforders vulgarly called fcorbutic amongft us ; 
which, though in many refpects different from the 
genuine fea-fcurvy, yet refemble this difeafe in 
many leading fymptoms, as lafiitude, livid 
blotches, fpungygums, and difpofition to hemorr- 
hage. And fome of the fymptoms of the fea- 
fcurvy feem to indicate a /aline, and not a fimply 
putrid acrimony ; fuch as that of the disjoining of 
bones formerly broken, in which cafe, the offeous 
matter of the callus is probably redifiblved, by 
the faline principle contained in the animal fluids. 
On the other hand, it feems to be a faft, that 
feveral of the northern nations, who'e diet is 
extremely putrid, (as before hinted with refpedt 
to the people of Kamtfchatka) are able to preferve 
themfelves from the fcurvy ; therefore, putrid 
aliments alone will not neceffarily induce it. 

On the whole, on an attentive confideration of 
the facts which have been recited, fome of which 
are upon a pretty extenfive fcale, I cannot but 
adopt the opinion, that the u/e of fea-falt is a very 
principal cau/e of the /curvy ; and that a total abfti- 
nence from it, is one of the moft important means for 

preventing this difeafe, 

A confider- 



in high Northern Latitudes. 1 03 

A confiderable article of the diet of the eight 
Englimmen, though neceflity alone could have 
brought them to ufe it, was probably of confider- 
able fervice in preventing the diforders to which 
their fituation rendered them liable. This was, 
the whale's fritters, which, though deprived of 
great part of their oil, mud ftill contain no 
fmall fhare of it. All voyagers agree, that the 
Samoides, Efquimaux, Greenlanders, and other 
inhabitants of the polar regions, make great ufe 
of the fat and oil of fifti and marine animals in 
their diet, and indeed can fcarcely fubfift without 
them. In what precife manner thefe fubftances 
act, is not, perhaps, eafily explained; but as the 
ufe of them would, doubdefs, caufe an accumula- 
tion of fimilar parts in the body, and as we find 
all animals deftined to endure the fevere cold of 
the arctic climates, are copioufly furnished with 
fat, we may conclude, that it pofTefTes fome 
peculiar efficacy in defending from the impreffions 
of cold. 

With refpe<5t to the warm reindeer's blood, which 
the Ruffian failors feem to have thought fo 
falutary, and the ufe of which is confirmed in 
one of the quotations ; if it has any particular 
effect, in preventing the fcurvy, beyond that of 
the juices extracted from recent animal flefh by 
cookery or digeftion, it muft probably refide in 
fome unaflimilated particles, derived from the 
vegetable food of the animal, and ftill retaining 

J3 4. considerably 



104 ® r ' Aikin on 'preferring Health 

considerably of a vegetable nature. It is well 
known that the chyle does not immediately iofe 
its peculiar properties, and mix undiftinguifliably 
with the blood ; and that the milk, chat fecretion 
the mod fpeedily and abundantly feparated from 
the blood, pofifefTes many properties in common 
with vegetable fubfbances. As to their other pre- 
fervative, the f wallowing of raw frozen meat, I am 
at a lofs to account for any falutary effects it 
may have, except as an aliment rendered eafy of 
digeftion, by the power of froft in making fub- 
ftances tender. 

To proceed to the next important article, that 
of drink. It appears, that in all the unfuccefsful 
inftances, vinous and fpirituous liquors were 
ufed, and probably in confiderable quantities. 
Thus, in one of the Dutch journals, notice is 
taken, that an allowance of brandy began to 
be ferved to each man as foon as the middle of 
September. Writers on the fcurvy feem almofl: 
unanimoufly to confider a portion of thefe liquors, 
as an ufeful addition to the diet of perfons expofed 
to the caufes of this difeafe j and due deference 
ought certainly to be paid to their knowledge 
and experience : but, convinced as I am, that 
art never made fo fatal a prefent to mankind 
as the invention of diftilling fpirituous liquors, 
and that they are feldom or never a neceffary, 
but almoft always a pernicious article in the diet 
of men in health, I cannot but look with peculiar 

fatisfaftior} 



in high Northern Latitudes.. 1 05 

fatisfadtion on the confirmation this opinion re- 
ceives by the events in thefe narratives. 

Indeed, from reafoning alone, we might 
naturally be led to the fame conclufion. A, 
great degree of cold renders the fibres rigid; 
and, by repelling the blood and nervous principle 
from the furface of the body, increafes the vital 
energy of the internal organs. Hence, the heart 
contracts more forcibly, and the ftomach has its 
warmth and mufcular action augmented. In 
thefe circumftances, ftimulants and aftringents 
feem by no means indicated ; but rather fub- 
ftances of an oppofite nature. We have acquired, 
by aflociation, the idea of oppofing aclual cold 
by matters potentially or metaphorically hot; but 
this is in great meafure a fallacious notion. On 
the contrary, it is found that the effects of exceflive 
heat are beft refifted by warm and acrid fubftances, 
fuch as the fpicy and aromatic vegetables which 
the hot climates moft abundantly produce, and 
which are fo much ufed in the diet of the inhabi- 
tants. And if it be admitted as a general law of 
nature, that every country yields the products 
beft adapted to the health and fuftenance of its 
inhabitants, we fhould conclude, that aromatic 
vegetables, and fermented liquors, are peculiarly 
appropriated to the warmer climates ¦, while 
bland, oily animal matters are rather defigned 
for the ufe of the frigid regions. Spirits, as 
aqtifeptics, may, indeed, feem to be indicated, 

where 



io6 Dr- Aikin on preferring Health 

where there is a necefiity of living upon corrupted 
putrefcent flefli; but they cannot acl: in this way 
withour, at the fame time, rendering the food 
harder and more indigeftible, and, confequently, 
leffening the quantity of nutriment to be derived 
from it. The temporary glow and elevation 
caufed by fpirituous liquors are, I imagine, very 
fallacious tokens of their good erFefts ; as they 
are always fucceeded by a greater reverfe, and 
tend rather to confume and exhauft, than to 
feed and invigorate, the genuine principle of 
vital energy. Another extremely pernicious 
erTecl: of thefe liquors, is, the indolence and 
ftupidity they occafion, rendering men inattentive 
to their own prefervation, and unwilling to ufe 
thofe exertions, which are fo peculiarly necelTary 
in fituations like thofe defcribed in the foregoing 
narratives. And this leads me to the confideration 
of a third important head, that of exercife. 

The utility of regular and vigorous exercife to 
men expofed to the caufes inducing fcurvy, is 
abundantly confirmed by experience. Captain 
Cook feems to attribute his remarkable fuccefs in 
preferving the health of his crew, more to great 
attention to this point than to any other circum- 
ftance. This opinion is greatly corroborated by 
the relations before us. Captain Monck's crew, 
wintering with their (hips in fafety before them, 
and well fu nifhed with all kinds of fea ftores, 
could have little occafion for labour. The two 

companies 



in high Northern Latitudes, 107 

companies of Dutchmen feem to have done little 
during their melancholy abode, but drink brandy, 
and fmoke tobacco over their fires. On the other 
hand, Captain James's men were very fufficiently 
employed in the laborious talk of building their 
pinnace, which, notwithstanding their weak and 
fickly ftate, they had nearly completed, before 
they found the work unneceiTary. The three 
Ruffians on Eaft Spitzbergen who furvived, are 
exprefsly faid, to have ufed much exercife by way 
of prefervative ; as alfo, according to Counfellor 
Muller, do thofe who winter on Nova Zembla, 
A difficulty, however, here occurs ; which is, that 
we know it to be the cuftom of the inhabitants of 
the very northern regions, to fpend their long 
winter night almoft entirely under ground ; 
feeming, in that refpeft, to imitate the animals of 
the country, which lie torpid in their holes and 
dens during the winter. From the journal of the 
eight Englifhmen, too, I fhould judge, that they 
were inactive during the greateft part of the time 
that the fun was invifible. But it is to be remarked, 
that in thefe inftances, what I confider as the 
mod powerful caufe of the fcurvy, the ufe of faked 
provifions, did not exifl: ; and therefore lefs power- 
ful prefervatives would be neceffary. Further, 
the Englifh crew had a very lcanty allowance of 
provifion of any kind ; which would, doubtltrfs, 
take off from the ncceflity of much exercife. 
Thus, the animals which deep out the winter, 

take 



lo8 Dr. Aikin on preferring Health 

take in no nutriment whatfoever, and therefore 
are not injured by abfolute reft. 

Exercife is probably ferviceable, both by pro- 
moting the difcharge of effete and corrupted 
particles by excretion, and by augmenting the 
animal heat. As far as cold in itfelf can be 
fuppofed a caufe of difeafe; its effects will be 
mod directly oppofed, by increafing the internal 
or external heat. And this leads to the confi- 
deration of the further means for guarding 
againft and tempering the intenfe feverity of the 
wintry air in thefe climates. 

It appears from the journals of the unfortunate 
{offerers in thefe attempts, that they endured 
great miferies from the cold ; their fuel foon 
proving inefficient for their confumption, and 
their daily increafing weaknefs preventing them 
from fearching for more, or keeping their fires 
properly fupplied. On the other hand, the 
Englifh and Ruffians had not only made their 
huts very fubftantial, but had fecured plentiful 
fupplies of fuel. And the nations who con- 
ftantly inhabit the arctic regions, are reprefented 
as living in an actually warm atmofphere in their 
fubterraneous dwellings, and guarded by impe- 
netrable coverings when they venture abroad. 
The animals, too, which retire during the winter, 
are always found in clofe caverns, or deep burrows, 
rolled up, and frequently heaped together in 
numbers, fo as to preferve a confiderable degree, 

of 



in high Northern Latitudes. iO£ 

of warmth. Of the feveral methods of procur- 
ing heat, there can be little doubt, that warm 
clothing, and the mutual contact of animal 
bodies, muft be the mod friendly, as being moft 
equable, and not inviting fuch an influx of cold 
air, as is caufed by the burning of an artificial 
fire. And the advantage of fubterraneous lodg- 
ings is proved by the well-known fact, of the 
unchanging temperature of the air at certain 
depths beneath the furface. 

Thefe are the moft material obfervations that 
have occurred to me, on reflecting upon the 
remarkable hiftories and facts above related. I 
would flatter myfelf that they might aflift in the 
framing of fuch rules and precautions, as would 
render the fuccefs of any future attempts of the 
like kind, lefs precarious. I fhall be happy, if 
they prove acceptable to the Society, to whom 
I have the honour of addrefling them ; and ftill 
more, if they in any degree conduce to the wel- 
fare of mankind. 



An 



no M. de Toiler on the Vleafures of the Mind. 

An Essay on the Pleasure which the Mtnd 
receives from the Exercife of its Faculties, and that 
of Taste in particular. By Charles de 
Polier, Efq. Read February 27, 1782. 



" Denique fit quodvis iimplex derttaxat et unum." 

Hor. de Art. Poet. 



THAT the exercife of the mind is no lefs 
neceffary to the exiftence of man, than 
that of the body, appears incontrovertible. The 
fcnfes of the brute part of the creation, are fo 
much more perfect than ours, that thereby they 
are enabled to purfue whatever is favourable, 
and to avoid whatever is detrimental to them. 
In giving us the powers of the understanding, 
the Author of the univerfe hath abundantly 
fupplied that defect. By them, we not only rife 
fuperior to the beafts in every means of provid- 
ing for our fupport, our defence, and our wel- 
fare j but we have improved upon nature, and 
made the whole world fubfervient to our wants, 
and to our defires. It was not, however, the 
intention of Providence, that thofe advantages 
fhould be gained without any trouble on our fide. 
The intellectual faculties, for the moft part, lie 
dormant in us 5 to roufe them, ftrong exertions 
are necefiary ; and men naturally fond of eafe, 

and 



hi the Exercife of its Faculties; 1 1 1 

and prone to indolence, would forever, perhaps, 
remain in a ftate little fuperior to that of the 
brutes, if neceffity, at firft, and pleafure after- 
wards, did not call forth thefe latent powers. 

Pleafure, the parent of joys and amufements, 
will be found alike the parent of Sciences, and 
of Arts ; Nature, in her kindnefs to man, having 
annexed an agreeable and pleafing fenfation to 
whatever gives exercife to the mind without fatiguing 
it. To this, we are indebted for the improve- 
ments made to arts, taught, at firft, by necefiity j 
and for the difcovery of many more, either agree- 
able or ufefuL Nay, fuch is the charm of that 
exercife, that it has been known fo to elevate the 
foul, as to detach her, as it were, from the 
body;* and freeing her from its fhackles, fet 

• We read in Aulas Gellius, that Socrmtet, to exercife his 
patience, as he fays, but perhaps to indulge, in all its 
extent, the pleafure we are here fpeaking of, ufed to Hand 
for twenty-four hours together, in a fteady pofture, immove- 
able, without even fo much as winking his eyes, which he 
conftantly kept fixed Upon the fame place, entirely a bforbed 
in his own thoughts, and feeming, as if an aftual feceffion 
had taken place between his foul and body. 

It will be but doing juftice to Aulus Gellius, though not a 
very elegant writer, to fet down here his own words. 

*' Stare folitus Socrates dicitur pertinaci ftatu, per dies 
atque per nodes, a fummo lucis ortu ad folem alterum 
onentem, inconnivens, immobilis, iifdem in -veftigiis, et 
ore atque oculis eundem in locum dire&is, cogitabundus, 
tanquam quodam feceflu animi faflo a corpore.''' 

Aul. Gell. Noc*. Attic. Lib. IT. Cap. i. 

her 



1 1 2 M. de Toiler on the "Pleafures of the Mind 

her in that (late, fo beautifully defcribed by 
Akenfide, when he fays, in his Pleafures of 
Imagination, 

" The high born Joul 

Difdains to reft her heav'n afpiring wing 
Beneath its native quarry. Tir'd of earth 
And this diurnal fcene, (he fprings aloft, 
Through fields of air; purfues the flying ftorm, 
Rides on the vollied light'ning through the heav'ns ; 
Or, yok'd with whirlwinds and the northern blaft, 
Sweeps the long traft of day." 

I omit the reft of that noble paflage, too long to 
be here inferted ; but written with all the enthu- 
Jiafm of poetic genius, joined to all the fweetnefs and 
harmony of numbers. 

Vide Akenside's Pleaf. of Imag. B. I. Ver. 183. 

The hiftory of Archimedes, the famous Sicilian 
Philofopher, is well known. Neither the fenfe 
of decency on one occafion, nor the fenfe of 
danger on another, could divert his thoughts 
from the objett they had in view, and from the 
pleafure they afforded him. If the truth of thefe 
furprizing anecdotes may be doubted, let us at 
lead acknowledge the poflibility of them, from 
what we may obferve every day among us. 
Would not one imagine, on feeing a Chefs-player, 
for inftance, fo entiiely wrapt up in himfelf, as 
to appear infenfible to every thing around him, 
that he is taken up with the care of his own 
fortune, the prefervation of the ftate, or fome 

fuch 



in the Exercifs of its Faculties. 113 

fuch great and important fubjecl ? And yet, 
all this intenfenefs of thought is produced by 
the pofition of a fmall piece of ivory, which 
gives exercife to his mind, and procures him 
that pleafure in which he feems fo totally ab- 
forbed. Other inftances might be adduced. 
The entertainment we receive from riddles^ 
charades, and fuch other Jaix d'E/prit, pro- 
ceeds from the fame fource. Every reader, of 
acute understanding and refined tafle, delights 
to meet in authors with fuch delicate thoughts, as 
not being immediately obvious, are juft concealed 
enough to give him the pleafure of finding them 
out, and as fuch, may be compared to Virgil's 
Galatea, 

" Et fugit ad Salices, et fe cupit ante videri." 

Viae. Buc. Eel. 3. 

There have been fome men who have thought, 
that the exercife of the mind was only agreeable, 
by anticipating the reputation which it might 
give. But, however ftrongly the motive of fame 
may operate on the minds of fome, yet the 
propofition, when attempted to be made general, 
is confuted by daily experience. How often do 
we employ whole hours in reading and meditation, 
without the leaft view to futurity, and merely» 
to gratify the prefent 'moment ? Does not this 
prove, that, independent of any other incentive, 
there is a pleafure inherent in whatever exercifes 
the mind without fatiguing it ? 

Vol. I. I This 



U4 M. de Poller on the Pleafures of the Mind 

This principle does not hold good of the mind 
only, but is equally applicable to every other 
component part of our being. There is an 
agreeable fenfation annexed to whatever exerciies 
the organs of the body without weakening them ; 
and in the fentiments or emotions of the heart, 
whatever keeps clear of the tumult of the pafllons, 
is attended with a degree of pleafure. Proofs of 
thefe pofitions might be brought innumerable, 
but would probably be unneceflary. Moftofthe 
ancient philofophers have laid them down, as the 
foundation of their ideas of human perfection : 
and there are few perfons, I believe, of any 
reflection and experience, who have not felt 
the truth of them in themfelves, or obferved 
it in others, llluftrations might, perhaps, be 
more agreeable than proofs ; but in a fubject 
of fuch an extent, and which embraces no lefs 
than the whole circle of phyfiology, ethics, and 
Belles Lettresy it is necefiary to confine onefelf, 
and I fhall therefore do no more at prefent, than 
offer to the Society fome few imperfect remarks, 
on fuch works of art, as give exercife to the mind, 
and come, chiefly, under the province of that 
faculty of the understanding, known by the 
jiame of Tafte. This choice is not altogether 
arbitrary. Mere intellectual pleafures, however 
agreeable in themfelves, by ovei (training the 
mind, become at length painful. Organic enjoy- 
ments laft only as long as we are in vigour. But the 

pleafures 



in the Exercife of its Faculties. 1 1 5 

pleafurcs of the eye and the ear, as Lord Kaims 
ingenioufjy obferves, in his Elements of Crititijm t 
hokling the middle way between thefe two, are 
particulaily fitted to occupy the mind without 
exhaulting it. They relax it after intenle ftudy, 
and reflore it to its proper tone, after the fatiety 
and dilguft, caufed by the mere pleafures of the 
ftnfes : they tend, therefore, molt effentially 
to prove the principle I mean to illuftrate. 

We fhall find, accordingly, that the agreeable 
fenfations we receive from the productions of the 
fine arts, are, in a great mcafure, owing to the 
order and fymmetry, which enable the mind 
to take in, without labour, ail the different 
parts of them. It is by this, that rhyme becomes 
agreeable in poetry. Some have contended in- 
deed, that this return of the fame founds, invented 
in the Gothic ages, ought to be claiTcd among 
the Acrofiics, Anagrams, and fuch other frivo- 
lous productions, whofe only merit lies in their 
difficulty. They inftance the Greeks and the 
Romans, whofe poetry, far more harmonious 
than ours, charms the fenfe, and delights the 
ear, without the help of rhyme. Eut they do not 
feem to have attended fufficiently to the ufe of 
poetry, and the nature of the ancient languages. 
Verfcs are made to be fung, or to be rehearfed. 
From the mouth of the actor, the mufician, or the 
reader, whoever he may be, they are fuppofed 
to pafs into the minds of a whole people ; and 

I 2 their 



1 1 6 M.de Poller on the Pleasures of the Mind 

their compofition is the more perfect, the more 
readily they prefent themfelves to the memory. 

The Greek and Latin tongues, by means of 
their long and fhort fyllables, and the various 
meafures into which they may be reduced, form 
a kind of chaunt, melody, or noted air, which the 
memory can eafily lay hold of, and therefore, 
the return of the fame founds, becoming ufelefs, 
would caufe nothing but a difagreeable repetition. 

Our modern languages have not the fame 
advantage, or poffefs it, at lead, in a much 
lefs degree. The blank verfe of the Englifh, 
German, and Italian, except in very few fhining 
exceptions, feems (as was quoted fome time ago, 
in a very ingenious paper prefented to this 
Society) to be verje only to the eye, or depends 
at leall fo much on the fkilfulnefs of the reader, 
as not to obtain the effedr. above-mentioned, with 
by far the greateft part of thofe who read them. 
Poems, where it is ufed, are not popular: the 
ideas they convey, the fentiments they mean 
to inculcate, however forcibly expreiTed, do not 
eafily recur to the memory : and, I dare fay, 
that for one perfon who remembers a pafiage 
from Milton, Young, or Akenfide, there are twenty 
who will quote fome from Pope, Dry-den, or 

Prior. 

This controverfy has long been decided in 

France, where, notwithstanding the frrenuous 
efforts of one of its greateft poets (Monfieur de 

la 



in the Exercife of its Faculties. 1 17 

la Motte) rhvme has kept in poetry the domi- 
nion, which the nature of the French language 
inconteftably gave it. 

In England, where a Shakejpeare and a Milton 
have written, the matter ieems yet to be Jub 
Judice. It would ill become me, as a young 
man, and a foreigner, to be that judge; but I 
may be indulged in fupporting what 1 have al- 
ledged here in favour of rhyme, by the opinion 
of the befb critic now living in this nation, Dr. 
John/on ; who, admiring the powers of Milton > 
and the amazing dignity given to his fentiments, 
by a verification which he otherwife rather 
difapproves, adds, tc He that thinks himfelf 
capable of aftonifhing, may write blank verfe: 
but thofe that hope only to pleafe, muft con- 
defcend to rhyme."* 

Another general objection has been brought 
againft rhyme. "How comes it, fays Monfieur 
de la Motte, that this monotony, which you 
affirm to be, by its nature, fo agreeable in 
poetry, is almoft conftantly fo unpleafant in a 
fifter-art, in mufic ?" To this might be anfwered, 
that the chief object of the mufician being to 
delight by the founds, he cannot fucceed better, 
than by varying them judicioufly : whereas, a 
Poet is not fatisfied with charming the ears 
of his audience i he willies to imprefs on their 

• Dr. John/on's Life of Milton. 

I 3 memory 



1 1 8 M. de Volier on the Pleafures of the Mind 

memory a feries of ideas, of fentiments, of 
expreffions ; and there are none of his verfes 
which he would not be glad to engrave, with 
indelible characters, on the hearts of all mankind. 
He avails himfelf, therefore, of the rhyme which 
modern languages offer him, as the mod favour- 
able help towards the attaining of his purpofe. 

But to return to our fubjett, from which I 
mud beg pardon for having wandered fo far. 
Imitation, which is the principle of all the fine 
arts, is another fpecies of fymmetry, whether it 
acts by means of colour, of founds, of geftures, 
or of words. The objects it prefents, eafily take 
"^ hold of our imagination, by the comparifon 
we make of them with objects already known 

to us. 

Arijiotle and his followers have maintained, that 
the pleafure produced in the mind, by the repre- 
fentation of any object, was owing to its acquiring, 
by that means, a new degree of knowledge. This 
opinion feems wrong, becaufe it allows no differ- 
ence between a juft, and an unfair reprefentation ; 
nor any gradation of pleafure, from the different 
degrees of execution. The mind every way makes 
a new acquifition of knowledge, and mud, there- 
fore, receive agreeable fenfations alike, from the 
Iliad of Homer, and the Thebaid of Statius ; the 
pictures of Raphael, and thofe of a fign-painter j 
the rriufic of Handel, and the uncouth notes of an 

Irifh piper. 

Other 



in the' Exercife of its Faculties. 119 

Other philofophers have afterted, that the 
reprefentation of an object pleafes, only by its 
interefring the paffions. And fo far it is true, 
that the foul cannot be moved, or ftrongly affected, 
without it. But does not even the leaft intercfting 
object make a flight imprefTion of pleafure, at 
leafl on the furface of the foul, if it is well repre- 
fented, and if an exaft fymmetry is to be feen 
between the picture and the original ? Every body 
muft have felt it j and it proceeds from this prin- 
cipal law in the nature of our fenfations — that 
any object becomes agreeable, whofe parts are 
fo formed, and fo difpofed, as to prefent the mind 
with an eafy, clear, and diftincTfc idea of the 
whole. 

What is called Contraft in painting, poetry, and 
eloquence, is another fort of fymmetry, which, by 
bringing contrary objects near to each other, fets 
Off the features of the one, by the comparifon we 
make of them with the features of the other. 
This relation has been taken from nature, in whofe 
works it feldorn fails of having a pleafing effect. 
It is from it, that the views in Switzerland, and in 
other mountainous countries, are fo particularly 
agreeable. The diffimilitude of the objects, which 
the eye embraces, renders them all more ftriking, 
and helps the mind to get a clearer idea cf the 
whole. Thus,when fkilfully applied to the produc- 
tionsof art, contraft is generally attended with great 
fuccefs. We accordingly read, that the ancient 

I 4 fculptors, 



1 20 M. de Polier on the Pleafures of the Mind 

fculptors, in order to fet off the beauty of a Venus, 
a Grace, or an Apollo, ufed to place them in a niche 
formed in the ftatue of a Fawn, or a Satyr ; and 
Virgil, in order to paint more ftrongly the agita- 
tion of Dido's heart, places the fcene of her agonies 
in the night, when Morpheus fpread his peaceful 
influence over all the reft of mankind. 

There are, befides fymmetry, certain relations 
or proportions, which the mind eafily conceives, 
and which therefore become agreeable. Thus, in 
architecture, for inftance, the height of the 
porticos, in regular buildings, is double the 
breadth : the height of the entablature, is a fourth, 
and that of the pedeftal, a third of the height of 
the column. All eminent architects, among the 
different proportions adapted to their defign, have 
always made choice of thofe, which the mind could 
comprehend without any difficulty. The fame 
may be obferved in mufic. Of all concords, the 
iinifon and the oclave fhould be the mod agreeable, 
becaufe they excite more vibrations in the fibres 
of the ear : but the pleafure we receive from this 
enchanting art, depends more on the mind, than 
on the organ adapted to convey it. The fifth is 
the molt agreeable of all concords, becaufe it 
prcfents to the mind a proportion, the finding out 
of which, gives it a degree of exercife, that caufes 
nowearinefs, confequently no difguft. 

Some compofitions there are in mufic, which, 
pleafe only profound muficians, and ftrike, per- 
haps, 



in the Exercife of its Faculties, 121 

haps, the reft of the hearers, as harfh and dif- 
cordant. May not this be owing to the very fine 
tafte of the former, by which they are enabled, in 
the midft of feeming diflbnances, to find out 
relations, which do not affect ears lefs exercifed 
than theirs ? 

The analogy which we find in all the works of 
nature, allows us to conjecture, that the fame law, 
which determines the agreeablenefs of founds, 
has alfo an influence upon other objects of our 
fenfes. Some colours, for inftance, fet together, 
give an agreeable fenfation to the eye, and more 
fo, than if they appeared fingle. The fame 
principle may, perhaps be extended to fmells, 
and to favours, with fome reftri&ions, however ; 
for, though it may be generally afierted, that thofe 
which are falubrious are agreeable ; yet it mud be 
owned, that their agreeablenefs does not always 
feem to depend on their falubrity. 

But it is not juft proportion and fymmetrical 
relation alone, that renders the works of the fine 
arts agreeable. They are chiefly made fo, by one 
principal object or common end, to which all 
their different parts are adapted, and which enables 
the mind the more eafily to comprehend, and to 
retain them. 

Wifdom, in morality, has been defined — The 
having one good purpofe in view, and ufing the 
beft means to attain that purpofe. So beauty, in 
the imitative arts, might be faid to confift, in the 

choice 



122 M. de Tclier on the Pleafures of the Mind 

choice of a good object, and in making every thing 
tend to the expreflion of it, as to one common 
end. Certain it is, that this correfpondence of 
the parts with the whole, is to be confideted, as 
the firft and principal caufe of agreeable fenfations. 
It is alone fufficient to give beauty to the mod 
fimple objects j and, if other embellifhments are 
wanted, it becomes the flandard of their propriety, 
and the rule by which we can determine, whether 
they are real beauties, or only (hining blemifhes. 
But to give the mind an eafier and more agreeable 
perception of the object, art has ftill gone farther. 
Among all thefe parts which are made to refer to 
one common end, a principal one is chofen, to 
which all others are fubordinate, and which 
becomes like a center of re-union for them. 
Architecture can illuftrate this. Unacquainted 
with the real beauties of their art, the Gothic 
architects never failed to place, on both fides of 
the body of their buildings, fuch enormous wings, 
or rather mafifes of (lone, as almoft totally eclipfed 
it, and kept the fight divided and undetermined. 
Bromante, Palladio, and after them molt of the 
modern architects, taught, perhaps, by Vitruvius, 
but certainly more acquainted than their pre- 
deceffors with what would ftrike the eyes agree- 
ably, have placed, in the middle of their buildings, 
a principal part, which, eminent above the reft, 
oives the fight a fixed point, from which it can 

glance 



in the Exercife of its Faculties. 1 23 

glance over all the reft, and fo enable the mind to 
get, at once, a clear and rjjftinct idea of the whole. 
All fculptors, in thofe works, where the eye 
might be divided by the number of figures, fuch 
as, groups, entaglios, baffo -relievos, mew great at- 
tention to this rule, and always chufe a principal 
objecl, to fix the fight of the beholders. The three 
Rhodian artifts, whofe joint work, according to 
the elder Pliny, * has produced the famous group 
of Laocoon, which now (lands in the Belvidere at 
Rome, feem to have had that principle ftrongly in 
view, in the difpofition of their figures. The 
Society, I truft, will forgive me, if, by way of 
illuftration, I here join a defcription of that 
celebrated monument of human powers, which 
Michael Angelo, himfelf a wonder of modern times, 
ufed to call, a miracle of art. This defcription I 
Hi all, for the mod part, take from a French book, 
which delerves to be better known in this country, 
from whence fo many annually go to vifit the 
clafiical ground of Italy, and fo many in vain, from 
the want of proper guides. I mean, Le Defcription 
hijlorique et critique de Vltalie, par Monf. V Abbe 
Richard, 6 vol. i2 mo . Paris 1769. In Englifh, 



* «< 



Sicut in Laocoonte, qui eft in Titi domo, opus 
omnibus, et pidurse et ftatuarise artis, anteferendum, ex 
uno lapide, cum et liberos, draconum, mirabiles nexus, 
de Confilii fententia fecere, fummi Artifices, Agriander, 
Polidorus, et Atbenedorus, Rhodii." 

Pmn. Hift. Nat. Lib. XXXVI. cap. 5 . 

Aq 



124 M.de Poller on the Pleqfures of the Mind 

An hiftorical and critical Defcription of Italy. 
By Abbe Richard. Six vols. i2 m0 . 

The group of Laocoon was found in the fhermes, 
or Baths of Titus, about the year 1506, under 
the pontificate of Julius II. who immediately 
bought it from the poiTefibr of the field, where 
it had been dug out. The figures are higher 
than nature, and of fo beautiful white marble, 
that the fight of it alone charms the eye. The 
workmanfhip is exquifite, of fuch a noble ftyle, 
and fuch a correclnefs of execution, as befpeak 
it a work of the beft Grecian age. It is not the 
Laocoon defcribed by Virgil, as rending the fky 
with bis (hrieks, ftruggling hard for his life, 
and roaring, like a bull flying from the altar 
where he has been wounded. 

" Clamores fimul horridos ad fidera tollit, 
Quales mugitus, fugit cum faucius aras 
Taurus." 

Virg. JEneld. II. 

11 His roaring fills the flitting air around. 
Thus, when an ox receives a glancing wound, 
He breaks his bands, the fatal altar flies, 
And, with loud bellowings, breaks the yielding Ikies.'* 

Dr YDEN. 

It is not that man, execrated by a whole people, 
for having difcharged a fpear againfl; the horfe 
con fee rated to Minerva, and whom the vengeance 
of the Gods pjrfues. 

- - " Scelus 



in the Exercife of its Faculties. 125 

. . " Scelus expendifle merentem 

Laocoonta ferunt, facrum, qui cufpide robur 

Lseferit." 

Virg. Ibid. 

" The general cry 

Proclaims Laocoon juftly doom'd to die, 
Whofe hand the will of Pallas had withftood, 
And dar'd to violate the facred wood." 

D R Y D E iV . 

It is a wretched parent, who feels his ftrength 
exhaufted, and is ready to fink under the accu- 
mulated weight, of exquifite pain, and deep felt 
affliction. His mouth half opened, and his eyes 
lifted up to heaven, feem to call for afliftance 
from the Gods, though defpair at the fame 
inftant overwhelms him at the fight of his own 
fate, and that of his unfortunate fons, half fmo- 
thered and devoured by the monfters, who crufh 
them all three. The expreffion of that group 
is admirable: but the fculptors have diftin- 
guifhed a principal objed in it: for, although 
the fons are equally well executed, and the one 
to the left in particular claims our fympathy, 
by the horrid ftate of pain in which he is repre- 
fented, (one of the ferpents beginning to tear 
open his fide) yet the father attracts the chief 
notice. He is that principal part of the whole, to 
which all others are referred; and it is by that 
judicious fuborclination and reference, that the 
artifts have found means to imprefs the fpe&ator 
with all the fentiments they meant to convey, 
and which, without labour to the mind, give it 

all 



126 M. de Poller on the Pleafures of the Mind 

all the pleafure fuch a reprefentation is able to 
produce. 

The pleafure we receive from a good painting, 
is alfo chiefly owing to this fubordination of 
parts, and reference of them to the principal 
object. Painters call it compofition ; and thofe 
matters have obtained the firft rank among them, 
who have been moft attentive to it. It was 
Raphael's, and Ruben's forte; and, being the happy 
refult of great genius, combined with a well 
cultivated tafte, is always lure of caufing the 
moft agreeable fenfations to the mind, that con- 
templates the effects of it. 

In poetry, but particularly in epic and dra- 
matic performances, the obfervation or neglect 
of this rule becomes, likewife, the teft of the 
pleafure they afford to a perfon of tafte. The 
different actors that appear in the narration, or 
on the fcene, muft. all concur in their different 
ftations to (tt off the main object, and keep the 
attention fixed upon it, or eife, the mind, dif- 
tradted with a multiplicity of objects, that feem 
to lay an equal claim to its notice, and perhaps 
to its feelings, grows weary, difgufted, and in- 
different to them all. Unity of a J! ion, in paint- 
ing and in poetry, is another confequence of the 
attention of artifts to the principle I meant to 
iiluftrate. For nothing can be more fatisfactory 
to the mind, than to take in, as it were, with a 
glance, a multitude of facts connected together, 

by 



in the Exerci/e of its Faculties. 127 

by their mutual relation to fome great and im- 
portant action. One may introduce, indeed, 
in a poem, feveral fables or plots, and collect in 
it, as it were in a gallery of pi&ures, a feries 
of portraits. It is what Ovid, Statins, JrioJlo y 
Shakefpeare, in his hiftorical plays, and feveral 
others, have done. But, many centuries before 
the oldeft of them, the great genius of Homer 
had conceived, that it would be prefenting a 
fpectacle far more agreeable to the mind, if a 
multitude of perfons were collected together in 
the fame picture, and were made to contribute 
to one and the fame action ; and upon that idea 
he formed the plan of the epic poem. 

Many years after him, Mfchylus, the firft who 
gave fome order and fome propriety to the drama, 
took from the epic poem, the plan of tragedy^ 
which he made to be, the reprelentation of an 
event unfolded in all its circumftances. That 
great Poet likewile underfrood, that this repre- 
fentation would far more pleafe the mind, if all 
the fcenes of it were connected by fome principal 
action, which would help the memory to retain 
them eafily. 

He carried, moreover, this idea ft ill farther, and 
to the unity of action, joined thofe of time and 
place. Sophocles and Euripedes, but efpecially the 
former, followed him pretty (tridtly, and Arijlotle 
drew his rules from their praclice. Swayed by 
the authority of great names, and, perhaps, led 

away 



12 8 M.de Tolier on the Tleajures of the Mind 

away too far by this principle, that there is a 
pleafure inherent in whatever enables the mind 
to get a clear and diftinct perception of the object 
prefented to it, the French critics defended, and 
the French dramatic poets wrote after thefe rules. 
In England, the amazing genius of Shakefpeare, 
probably unacquainted with Ariftotle and his 
precepts, having early, and in general happily, 
foared above all restraints, gave, perhaps, a bias 
to the tafte of the nation ; or a fanction, at lead, 
to future dramatic authors, for not attending 
fcrupulouily to the ftricl unities. Thefe, how- 
ever, were alfo defended by the Englijh critics, 
and, in theory, admitted by the bed poets : but 
the practice did not correfpond ; and there is not 
at prefent a theatre in Europe, in which thefe rules 
are lefs obferved. 

I do not mean this, as an abfolute reproach. 
Convinced, as I am, that the pleafures of the heart 
are much fuperior to thofe of the mind, I think, 
that rules invented to give eafe and pleafure to 
the latter, may often be facrificed to a multitude 
of interefting events and fituations, that raife 
ftrong emotions in the former, and ftrike it 
forcibly. But at the fame time, illufion being 
the charm of theatrical repreftrntations, care 
ought to be taken not to deftroy it, nor diminifh 
the concern and fympathy of the Spectators, by 
too great a deviation from probability. If, on 
the ftage, an old man were to play the part of 

a young 






in the Exercife of its Faculties. 129 

a young one, if, the fcene being in a palace, the 
fceneries were to prefent trees and landscapes 
to our view, if the dreffes did not correfpond, 
in fome degree to the dignity of the perfons 
reprefented, all thefe difcordances would offend 
us. 

The fame is applicable to the deviation from 
the three unities. If, in a drama, the principal 
actions are multiplied, if in the fpace of a few 
hours, many centuries are made to elapfe, if the 
fpectator is tranfported in an inftant, from one 
part of the world to another, all thefe abfurdities 
become fo many warnings againft the falfity of 
the fpectacle ; and a voice feems to iffue out of 
them, which bids us, not to give fincere tears to 
feigned misfortunes. 

Such are the arguments of the critics, who 
follow the rules of Ariji 'ot/e. Lord Reims, on the 
other fide, proves, from the different nature of 
the Grecian, and the modern drama, that the 
unities of time and place are, by no means, fo 
neceffary with us, as they were with the ancients. 

The interruption of the reprefentation, on our 
theatre, between the different acts, gives the 
mind a facility of fuppofing any length of time, 
or change of place j and it becomes not more 
difficult for the fpectator, at the beginning of 
an act, to imagine a new place, or a different 
time, than it was at firft, to imagine himfelf at 
Athens, or in a period of time two thoufand years 
back. 

Vol. I. K But 



1 30 M. de Polier on the Pleafures of the Mind 

But the fame freedom cannot be taken with 
the unity of action. The pleafure, which the 
mind, as we obferved above, receives from a 
chain of fadts connected together, and tending 
to one common end, renders this unity efiential, 
alike in epic and dramatic compofitions. Every 
thin" - , however beautiful in itfelf, that breaks 
this chain, or interrupts this relation, looks like 
an excrefcence, and becomes unpleafant. An epic 
poem, with two principal actions, like a play, 
with two main plots, would foon confufe and 
tire the reader and the fpe&ator 3 and fo far do 
the rules of Ariftotle agree with nature. An 
epifode and an under-plot may be allowed for the 
fake of variety ; but they muft be connected with 
the principal action, or elfe they become great 
blemifhes. Milton, in this refpedt, as indeed in 
many others, has the advantage over Homer and 
VirnU His epifode, of the battle of angels, and 
the creation of the world, is more intimately con- 
nected with his fubject, than the defcription of 
Achilles* fhield, or even the defcent of /Eneas into 
hell. Far from breaking the unity of action, 
it rather ftrengthens it, by making us acquainted 
with the caufe of what we have read, and of what 
is to follow. It is, therefore, productive of great 
mental enjoyment, as there is no relation that 
pleafes the mind more, than that of caufe and 
effect. 

This 



in the Exenife of its Faculties. 1 3 1 

This great rule, of the unity of a&ion, is an 
infuperable objection to tragi -comedy ¦, and in- 
attention to it fhocks perfons of tafte in-fome of 
our bed plays. In the Provoked Hit/laud, for 
inftance, all the fcenes relating to the family of 
the Wrongbeads, however laughable, and charac- 
teriftic in themfelves, are certainly to be ac- 
counted blemifhes, becaufe they flop the tide of 
fentiment railed by the interefting fcenes, between 
a fenfible, loving, and juftly incenfed hufband, 
and a giddy, extravagant, though good-natured 
wife. 

This d'uTertation on the unities, will alfo be 
looked upon, I fear, as an excrefcence to this 
paper, already too long; but I indulged myfelf 
in it with the thought, that it might, probably, 
give room to fome interefting converfation — the 
avowed purpofe of the e flays prefented to this 
fociety — and in that light, I beg, and I hope for, 
your indulgence. 

From what has been read, it will appear, that 
regularity and ccntraji, proportion and congndty, 
uniformity , variety, and fimplicity, in the objects 
prefented to the mind, give it an exercife, which 
is attended with neither trouble nor fatigue, and 
which is therefore agreeable. 

That thefe fources of pleafure exifl: in our 
nature, feems evident, from their being uniform 
and univerfal ; and that they were given us for 
wife and good purpofes, is what no one can 

K 2 difpute, 



132 M. de Poller on the Pkafures of the Mind 

difpute, who confiders, with what care the great 
Author of our being has provided us with all 
means of happinefs. They evidently contribute 
to it, by adding beauty to the objecls that 
furround us, and by procuring us enjoyments far 
fuperior to thofe of the fenfes. In this view only, 
it would be incumbent upon us to cultivate the 
natural relifh we have for them : but Cicero^ in his 
admirable work de Officiis, (hews us a dill nobler 
ufe, for which they may have been intended. 
After having enumerated the qualities which man 
has in common with other animals, and fome of 
the advantages that diftinguifh him, he proceeds 

to fay, 

" Necvero ilia parva vis Naturas eft, 

rationifque, quod unum hoc animal fentit quid fit 
ordo; quid fit, quod deceat ; in fadlis dictifque 
qui modus. Itaque eorum ipforum quas afpeftu 
fentiuntur, nullum aliud animal, pulchritudinem, 
venuftatem, convenientiampartium fentit. Quam 
fimilitudinem Natura, ratioque ab oculis ad ani- 
mum transferee, multo etiam magis pulchritudi- 
nem, conftantiam, ordinem in confiliis, fa&ifque 
confervandum putat: cavetque, ne quid indecore, 
effasminat eve, faciat ; turn in omnibus etopinio- 
nibus et fadtis, ne quid ii' idinofe aut faciat aut 
cogitet. Quibus ex rebus confi;irur, et eflicitur, 
id quod quasrimus, Honeflum." 

Cicer. de Officiis. Lib. I. 

" The 






in the Exercife of its Faculties. 13 j 

c< The energy of nature and of human reafon 
are ftrikingly difplayed in this circumftance, that 
man is the only animal endued with the perception 
of order, decency, and propriety in words and in 
a&ions. He alone difcerns, in vifible objeds, 
beauty, graceful Inefs, andfymmetry. And, tranf- 
ferring the analogy, from the fight to the mind, 
he becomes fenfible, that fuperior beauty, regu- 
larity, and order, (hould diftinguifh the intention 
and behaviour; and cautioufiy avoids whatever is 
unbecoming and unmanly, and particularly, every 
loofe imagination and expreMion. An attention 
to thefe things forms and conftitutes that Honeftum> 
which is the fubjecT: of our ena 4 uiry." 

Lord Kabns, whom every lover of genuine 
criticifrri muft read with pleafure, and quote with 
gratitude, obferves alfo, that, " The reafon'ngs 
employed in the fine arts, are of the fame kind 
with thofe, which regulate our conduct. Mathema- 
tical and metaphyfical reafonings (fays he) have 
no tendency to improve focial intercourfe, nor 
are they applicable to the common affairs of 
life: but a juft tafte of the fine arts, derived 
from rational principles, furnifhes elegant fub- 
jefts for converfation, and prepares us for 
afting in the focial ftate, with dignity and 
propriety." * 

• Introduction to Elements of Critlcifm. 

K 3 Thus 



134 Mr. Wimpey on (Economical Kegifiers. 

Thus we find an analogy and a connexion 
formed, between the pleafures of tafte, and the 
fenfe of morality. The fame principle of pro- 
priety, which leads us to the difcovery of what 
is beautiful and pleafing to the mind, when 
Upplied to the heart, will help us to find, what 
is virtuous, what is honeft, and what conftitutes 
the true pleafure arifing from its emotions. 
What I have attempted to illuftrate, may then 
be carried farther, and we may pronounce, 
that, as there is a pleafure inherent in whatever 
exercifes the mind, without fatiguing it, fo there 
is a pleafing fenfation annexed to every emotion 
of the heart, that is not poifoned by fear, hatred, 
envy, revenge, and fuch other irregular and dii- 
orderly pafiions. 



¦¦¦ ¦imniumm j 



On CEconomical Registers. By JL Wimpey, 
Read March 13, 1782. 

N a country fo juftly refpe&able as Great 
Britain, for its proficiency in the Arts, in 
Manufacture, Trade, and Commerce, and in its 
literary acquifitions in every branch of Science, 
it is rather furprizing, that there fhould be fo 
entire a deficiency in CEconomical Hiftory. 

To 



Mr* Wimpy on (Economical Regijlers. 135 

To the queftions, What may be the amount of 
the circulating cafh in the kingdom ? What 
is the ftate of its population ? Has it increafed, 
or decreafe'd, ^within the laft fifty years ? Have 
the many and great improvements in agricul- 
ture rendered the prices of provifions, &c. pro- 
portionably cheaper ? And what is the increafe 
of quantity, on an average, for half a century 
back, compared with preceding times? — To thefe 
queftions, no fdtis factory anfwers have been given. 

Thefe are interesting and important enquiries, 
concerning which, men of the beft abilities have 
employed their thoughts with very little fuccefs, 
as nothing, with any degree of certainty, can be 
concluded from what they have written upon 
thofe fubjects. Indeed, their opinions are fo 
exceedingly wide of, and repugnant to, each 
other, that it clearly appears they have no cer- 
tain data to calculate upon. This indeed is not 
fo much a reflection on the preient times, as on 
the part. But it will equally reflect: on the pre- 
fent, when they, like the former, (hall become 
the part, unlefs feme means are adopted, to 
furnim our fuccelTors with thofe interesting facts, 
the want of which leaves us enveloped in the 
dark (hades of ignorance. 

Some years fince, I was honoured with a letter 
from Monfieur Turgor, then high in the favonr 
of his royal mafter, and at the head of one of 

K 4 the 



136 Mr. Whnpey on (Economical Regifters. 

the firft departments in the kingdom of France. 
He requefted I would inform him, What might 
be the proportion, which the produce in grain of 
the lands in England of one year bore to that of 
another, for a feries of thirty or forty years. To 
this I could only anfwer, That we had no annual 
regifter, either public or private, that I knew' 
of, which could anfwer his queftion ; and that the 
only means we had of gueffing, were, by the pro- 
portion which the price of one year bore to that 
of another. 

This was not lcfs aftonifhing to him, than it 
had been to feveral other fagacious foreigners, 
who have fhrewdly remarked, " that, in Eng- 
land, fo keen are individuals in the purfuit of 
their own private emolument, and lb ignorant 
and remifs is its government, that they have 
frequently given a bounty of fifteen per cent, 
to export their corn, when all they had in flock 
was very far fhort of being fufficient to fupport 
their own people, till the next harvefl:." In this 
deplorable (late of ceconomical and commercial 
ignorance, we continue dill, which I conceive 
might be remedied with little difficulty, trou- 
ble, or expence. But, for government to give 
a bounty for the exportation of grain, to the 
amount of from fifteen to thirty per cent, as it 
hath fometimes done, without knowing, either 
the average quantity grown, or the quantity 

it; 



Mr. TFimpey on (Economical Regifters. 137 

its people confume; and confequently, without 
knowing, if the ftock remaining on hand would 
feed its people till the next crop be harvefted; 
and whether it muft not of neceffity be forced 
to purchafe again at double the price, as it has 
alfo fometimes done, is furely one of the moft 
abfurd meafures, that a thoughtlefs, inconfiderate 
clafs of men ever adopted. It has been fre- 
quently obferved, that our legiflators have 
been very fruitful in the invention of penal 
Jaws ; but in the meafures of prevention, which 
are infinitely more falutary, they are either very 
inattentive, or very barren. 

The queftion of population, whether it in- 
creafeth, or is upon the decline, is not to be 
afcertained with any tolerable degree of exact- 
nefs, without an actual enumeration of all the 
people in the ifland. This may be thought a 
work of too great extent and trouble, to be 
attempted. So it would, indeed, if it were to 
be effected by one, or a few perfons. But how 
very eafy would it be, if performed by the parifh 
officers ? They, by the duty of their office, are 
obliged to have a complete lift of all thofe, who 
are rated towards the relief of the poor; and 
another of all thofe who are the objects of fuch 
relief. A lift of thofe who are not in either of 
thofe claffes, would coft the officers of any parifh 
very little trouble. Confequently, the number 
in each clafs, and the fum total of the whole, 

might 



138 Mr. Wimpey on (Economical Regtjlers. 

might be obtained with as little trouble, as the 
numbers in each clafs, and the fum total, could 
be obtained by the officers of any refpeclive 
parifti. 

If fuch lifts were correctly taken every two, 
three, four, or five years, the ftate of increafe, 
or decreafe, might be precifely known, with little 
or no exnence to any body. Of fuch lifts, might 
be formed a kind of General Dire&ory; containing 
the names, addition, number, ages, and fex, of 
all the families in Great Britain. Thus, in Man- 
chefter, 

N. R. Hatter, V% -.V 3 males, 4 females, 
that is, four under twelve, and three above ; three 
of them males, four females. Let any one carry 
his ideas through the ftreet he lives in, or is 
familiarly acquainted with, and he will fee, with 
how much eafe he may acquire a knowledge of 
ail thefe particulars, reflecting every family in 
jt; and, by a fimilar practice, on a general plan, 
a precife knowledge may be obtained of every 
family in the nation. 

Perhaps it would be too adventurous, to at- 
tempt to recommend a knowledge thus acquired 
to fome practical ufes, to which it feems capable 
of being applied, with a profpect of the molt 
beneficial effects. 

A very great part of thofe, who have no other 
means of fubfiftence, but the fpoils 3nd depra- 
dations committed upon the public, are, in their 

manner 



Mr. Wim$ey on (Economical Regifters. 139 

manner of living, a kind of citizens of the world, 
without chara&er, or defcription, fixed habitua- 
tion, refidence or connection, by which they 
may be traced as to their mode of fubfiftence. 
And how defirable foever it may be to bring 
them into broad day light, that every man may 
have his eye upon them, yet in a country, where 
the blefiing of liberty is defervedly in fuch high 
efteem, fears are awakened, fufpicions alarmed, 
jealoufies excited, left any incroachment fhould 
be made on the liberty of the fubject, under the 
fpecious, but deceitful appearance of public 
good. 

Were this a proper place, I would endeavour- 
to give the true idea of genuine liberty, in which, 
that of the individual fhould perfectly- accord, 
with the fafety and happinefs of the ftate. Like 
the bafe of a pyramid, it fhould be erected on 
a large extended bottom, its centre of gravity 
coinciding with its centre of magnitude, whick 
nothing could fhake or overturn, till its materials 
fhould be crumbled into one common ruin. 
At prefent, I think it fcems to ftand, like Fortune 
on the fummit of a globe, whofe ddcent on one 
fide, is into the region of anarchy and licentious 
confufion ; on the other, of tyranny and flavery, 
from both which I hope we fliall ever efcape. 

I will beg leave, however, to throw out a 
few hints. They may fuggefl the means of 
preventing fome, and of detecting others, in the 

purfuit 



140 Mr. Wimpey on (Economical Kegijlers. 

purfuit of practices, which are thebaneoffociety, 
and a difgrace to humanity. 

Let us fuppofe, then, that complete lifts have 
been taken of every family in Great Britain, 
of men, women, children, fervants, and lodgers. 
That every town and village were obliged to 
provide fufficient number of Medals made of 
copper, about an inch and half diameter, with 
the name of the town, country, and year infcribed 
round the margin That every perfc above 
twelve years of age, fhould be obliged v ?n they 
went above a certain number of miles from 
home, to wear it about them, that they might 
be able to prove fatisfaftorily, who they are, 
and from whence they come. Acrofs the piece, 
fhould be engraved the name, the profeflion or 
addrefs, and the age of the perfon, at the date 
of the impreffion. By this means, every per- 
fon would have it in his power to confirm the 
account he might give of himfelf, by an in- 
conteftible voucher; and every fufpicious per- 
fon, wherever he might happen to appear, 
fhould be liable to be taken before the neareft 
civil officer, where he fhould produce his 
medal, and anfwer all proper queftions, or be 
liable to be committed by any one of his 
Majefty's Juflices of peace. The want of a 
medal fhould be deemed a fufpicious circum- 
ftance, and the perfon fhould be retained in 
fafe cuftody, till he could obtain fufficient proof 

of 



Mn Wim$ey on (Economical Regifters. 141 

of the place of his refidence from the parifh 
officers, or from fome one of them. 

If any labouring man, handicraft- man, artificer, 
or workman of any fort, fhall come as a Granger 
into any town, and afk employment, the perfon 
who employs him (hall firfi; demand a fight of 
his medal, take a copy of its infcription, and by 
the firfi: poll fend a letter of advice to the officers 
of the parifli he came from. And in neglect or 
contempt of fuch advice, he fhall be liable to a 
penalty fufficient to compel its ftricl obfervance. 

Upon this plan, fhould any fervant, day- 
labourer, or workman of any fort, abfcond 
from his place of abode for any mifdemea- 
nor, or trefpafs he had committed, he could 
not proceed many days unapprehended ; for 
no perfon fhould be fuffered to entertain a 
ftranger above one night, without taking a copy 
of his medal, and fending advice to his parifh. 
A man could not then run away, defert his. 
family, and throw them as a burden on the 
parifh, becaufe detection would immediately 
purfue him, bring him back in difgrace, and 
infiicl an adequate punifhment upon h'm. 

"Were fuch a plan to be profecuted with vigour, 
it would be a fufficient bar to every attempt of 
thievery and roguery, for impunity in which, the 
delinquent ultimately depended upon defertion. 
No man, in his fenfes, could depend upon a means 
for his fecurity, in which he knew before-hand it 

would 



142 Mr. Wimpey on (Economical Regijters. 

would be impofiible for him to fucceed. De- 
fertion is the dernier refort of every villain. 
When he finds himfelf fufpected, he inftantly 
runs his country, and endeavours to fecrete him- 
felf at a diftance, in places to which, as he 
imagines, fufpicion is leaft likely to purfue him. 
But under this regulation, whether could he 
fly ? Let it be whither you pleafe, if he pro- 
duces his medal, it betrays him j if he does not, 
it raifes a fufpicion which juftifies his detention, 
till he is fairly cleared of all fufpicion. 

As this plan would operate beneficially, in the 
detection and prevention of villainy, it would 
fometimes prove no lefs ufeful to the honeft, but 
unfortunate man. Innocent men have been 
fometimes apprehended for fpies, for highway- 
men, and other atrocious crimes, from a fimi- 
larity of circumftances, which it was not in their 
power to avoid. A highwayman, well mounted 
on a grey horfe, fome years fince, robbed in the 
neighbourhood of London. Soon after, a perfon 
from a diftant county happened to pafs the road 
on a good horfe of the fame colour. Some per- 
fons took the alarm, purfued him, and took 
him into cuftody. As he was innocent, he came 
to no harm, but that of being detained all night, 
and the trouble he was put to, of proving he was 
not the man fufpected, which he could do no 
otherwife, than by proving who he was ; which, 
in many cafes, where a man is totally un-' 

known. 



Mr. V/impey on (Economical Regljlers. 143 

known, might be attended with much trouble 
and vexation. 

I by no means offer this, as a well digefted plan 
competent to the accomplishment of the intended 
purpofe ; but as the outlines of a fcheme, which 
I am well convinced, by a perfon of abilities, 
might be made perfectly adequate to every pur- 
pofe propofed. 

I will beg leave to make one obfervatioa 
more, before I have done. 

In a fertile country like England, which grows 
more corn than its inhabitants can confume, 
and, of courfe, renders it a commercial article* 
it is of great importance to afcertain the follow- 
ing fads, for the regulation of the exportation 
of that article. 

I. What is the annual average growth of core 
in England for a feries of years ? 

II. What is the annual average confumptioa 
for the fame time ? 

Thefe being known, it would appear, what is 
the annual furplus, and confequenrly, how much 
might be exported annually, conMently with the 
fafety and well being of the people. This is a 
qucftion of the greateft importance to this coun- 
try ; a queftion, the ignorance of which has colt 
this nation millions, and by which our fagaek- 
neighbours, the Dutch, have profited million 
Though totally neglected, I conceive it might 
be afcrtained with no great difficulty or 

trouble 



144 & r ' Barnes on the Pleqfure Jometmes felt 

trouble to any body. But this is a matter of too 
much confequence and extent, to be explained 
in a curfocy paper. 



On the Pleasure which the Mind in many Cafes 
receives from contemplating Scenes of 
Distress. By T. Barnes, D. D. Read 
dpril 3, 1782. 

Suave mari magno, turbantibus sequora ventis, 
E terra alterius magnum fpe&are periclum. 
Non quia vexari quenquam eft jucunda voluptas;- 
Sed quibus ipfe malis careas, quia cernere fuave eft. 

Lucretius. 

'Tp'HE pleafure defcribed by the Poet in this 
motto, and of which he has mentioned fo 
ftriking and appofite an inftance, may perhaps, 
at firft,feem of fo fingular and aftonifhing a nature, 
that feme may be difpofed to doubt of its 
exiftence. But that it does exift, in the cafe here 
referred to, and in many others, of a fimilar kind, 
is an undoubted fact : and it may not appear an 
ufelefs, or difagreeable entertainment, to trace its 
fource in the human bteaft, together with the 
final caitfe, for which it was implanted there by 
our benevolent Creator. 

" Shall I, it may be faid, feel complacency in 
beholding a fcene, in which many of my fellow- 
creatures 



Plate 'J Vol I 



Figl 





Jupiter 



7/ 




Fig: 2. 





Vexes 



vr/ 




Fig.x 





Satuo 

__ / yyyyy 





} 




AB S 



//'// 



./>£& 





Mercuri 

2 •/ 



)// /Y / 



RMtfedat tke Aa&ms<fep( r 2$ /A /7>tytr TJhddtwtheStrund. 



\;,l, •¦*.!?• Str.Tut 



from contemplating Scenes ofDiftrefs. 145 

creatures are agonizing with terror, whilft I can 
neither diminifh their danger, nor, by my fym- 
pathy, divide their anguifh ? At the fight of 
another's woe, does not my bofom naturally 
feel pain? Do I not fhare in his fenfations ? 
And is not this ftrong and exquifite fenfibility 
intended by my Maker, to urge me on to active, 
and immediate afiiftance ? Thefe fenfations are 
indeed attended with a noble pleafure, when I 
can, by friendly attention, or by benevolent 
communication, footh the forrows of the poor 
mourner, fnatch him from impending danger, 
or fupply his preffing wants. But, in general, 
where my fympathy is of no avail to the wretched 
fufferer, I fly from the fpectacle of his mifery, 
unable, or unwilling to endure a pain, which is not 
allayed by the fweet Satisfaction of doing good." 

It will be incumbent on us, in anfwer to thefe 
objections, in the firft place, to prove the reality 
of the feeling, the caufe of which, in the human 
constitution, we here attempt to explore. 

Mr. Addifon, in his beautiful papers on the 
Pleafures of the Imagination,* hasobferved, " that 
objects or fcenes, which, when real, gave difguft 
or pain, in description^ often become beautiful and 
agreeable. Thus, even a dunghill may, by the 
charms of poetic imagery, excite pleafure and 
entertainment. Scenes of this nature, dignified 

* Speftator, fixth volume, No, 418. 
Vol. I. L by 



1 46 Dr. Barnes on the Pleafure fometimes felt 

by apt and ftriking defcription, we regard with 
fomething of the Tame feelings, with which we 
look upon a dead monfter. 

.. ._.-.-.. Informe cadaver 

Protrahitur: nequeunt expleri corda tuendo 
Terribiles oculos, vultum, villofaque fetis 
Pe&ora femiferi, atque extin&os faucibus ignes. 

Virgil. 

" This, he obferves, is more particularly the 
cafe, where the defciiption raifes a ferment in the 
mind, and works with violence upon the paffions. 
One would wonder, adds he, how it comes to 
pafs, that palTions, which are very unpleafant at 
all other times, are very agreeable, when excited 
by proper defcription ; fuch as terror, dejection, 
grief, &c. This pleafure arifes from the reflection 
we make upon ourfelves, whilft reading it, that 
we are not in danger from them. When we read 
of wounds, death, &c. our pleafure does not rife 
fo properly, from the grief, which thefe melan- 
choly defcriptions give us, as from the fecret 
eomparifon we make of ourfelves, with thofe who 
fuffer. We mould not feel the fame kind of pleafure, 
if we actually Jaw a perfon lyii g under the tor- 
tures, that we meet with in a d, fcriptioo." 

And yet, upon the principle a.Tigned by this 
amiable writer, we might feel the fame, or even 
higher pleafure, from the afiual view of diftrefs, 

than 



from contemplating Scenes of Bijlrefs, 147 

than from any description; becaufe the comparifon 
of ourfelves with the fufferer would be more 
vivid, and confequently, the feeling more intenfe. 
I would only obferve, that the caufe which he 
affigns for this pleafure, is the very fame with that 
afTigned by Lucretius, in our motto. Mr. Addifort 
applies it to the description j the Poet, to the aftual 
contemplation, of affe&ing fcenes. In both, the 
pleafure is fuppofed to originate in felfijhnefs: 
But, wherever the focial paffions are deeply in- 
terefted, as they are here fuppofed to be, from the 
pathetic description, or the dill more pathetic [urvey, 
of the fufferings of another, the fympathetic 
feelings will, of themfelves, at once, and previous 
to all reflection, become a fource of agreeable and 
tender emotions. They will thus dignify and 
enhance the fatisfaction, if any fuch be felt, arifing 
merely from the confideration of our own perfonal 
fecurity. And the more entirely we enter into 
the fcene, by lofmg all ideas of its being either 
paft, or fabulous, the more perfectly we forget 
ourfelves, and are abforbed in the feeling, — the 
more exquifite is the fenfation. 

But, as our fubfequent fpeculations will chiefly 
turn upon the pleafure derived from real fcenes of 
calamity, and not from thofe which are imaginary, 
it may be expeiled, that we adduce inftances, in 
proof, that fuch pleafure is felt, by perfons very 
different in their tafte, and mental cultivation. 

L 2 I w in 



148 Dr. Bar fie s on the Pleafure /owe times felt 

t will not mention the horrid joy, with which 
the favage feafts his eye upon the agonies and 
contortions of his expiring prifoner — expiring in 
all the pangs which artificial efuehy can inflicl ! 
Nor will I turn your eye to the almoft equally 
favage fons of antient Rome, when the majefty 
of the Roman people could rufh, with eagernefs 
and tranfport, to behold hundreds of Gladiators 
contending in fatal conflict, and, probably, more 
than half the number extended, weltering in 
blood, and writhing in agony, upon the plain. 
Nor will I mention the Spanifh Bull-Feafts ; nor 
the fervent acclamations of an Englifh Mob 
around their fellow-creatures, when engaged in 
furious battle, in which it is poffible, that fome 
of the combatants may receive a mortal blow, 
and be hurried, dreadful thought ! in this awful 
date, to the bar of his Judge. 

Let us furvey the multitudes, which, in every 
part of the kingdom, always attend an execution. 
It may perhaps be laid, that, in all places, the 
vulgar have little of the fenfibility and tendernefa 
of more pdifhed bofoms. But, in the laft- 
mentioned inftance, an execution, there is no 
exultation in the furkrings of the poor criminal. 
He is regarded by every eye, with the mod 
meking compaffion. The whole affcmbly 
fympathizes with him, in his unhappy fkuation. 
An awful ftillnefs prevails, at the dreadful 
moment. Many are wrung with unutterable 

fenlations ; 






from contemplating Scenes ofDiJlrefs. 149 

fenfations : and prayer and filence declare, more 
loudly than any language could, the intereft 
they feel in his diftrefs. Should .a reprieve 
come to refcue him from death, how great is the 
general triumph and congratulation ! And, pro- 
bably, in this multitude you will find, not the 
mere vulgar herd alone, but the man of fuperior 
knowledge, and of more refined fenfibility; who, 
led by fame ftrong principle, which we wifh to 
explain, feels a pleafure greater than all the pain, 
great and exquifite as one fhould imagine it to be, 
from fuch a fpectaele. 

The man who condemns, many of the fcenes 
we have already mentioned, as barbarous and 
Shocking, would, probably, run with the greatefl: 
eagernefs to fome high cliff, overhanging the 
ocean, to fee it fwelled into temped, though 
a poor veffel, or even a fleet of vefFels, were 
to appear as one part of the dreadful fcenery, 
now lifted to the heavens on the foaming furge, 
now plunged deep into the fathomlefs abyfs, 
and now dallied upon the rocks, where they are, 
in a moment, ihivered into fragments, and, with 
all their mariners, entombed in the wave. Or, to 
vary the queflion a little j Who would not be 
forward to (land fafe, on the top of Tome moun- 
tain or tower, adjoining to a field of battle, in 
which two armies meet in defperate conflict, 
though, probably, thoufands may foon lie before 
him proftrate on the ground, and the whole field 

L 3 pre fen % 



150 Dr. Barnes on the Pleqfures Jometimes felt 

prefent the mod horrid fcenes of carnage and 
defolation ? 

That, in all thefe cafes, pleafure predominates 
in the compounded feeling, is plain from hence, 
becaufe you continue to furvey the fcene ; whereas, 
when pain became the ftronger fenfation, you 
would certainly retire. I was lately in company 
with a Gentleman, who defcribed to me, in very 
glowing and pi&urefque colours, an engagement 
between two privateers, of which he had been 
a fpeflator, from one of the cliffs on the eaftern 
coaft of England. Several lives were loft ; and 
the concert was long, doubtful, and fevere. 
Having this fubjefc in my thoughts, I afked him, 
whether he felt pleafure from the fpe&acle. He 
anfwered with great energy, that he would not 
have miffed the fight for a very confiderable fum. 
His tone, and manner proved, that he fpoke from 
his heart. 

Cultivation may, indeed, have produced fome 
minuter differences, in the tafte and feelings of 
different minds. Thofe, whofe fenfibilites have 
not been refined by education or fcience, may 
feel the pleafure, in a more grofs and brutal form. 
But do not the mod polifhed natures feel a 
fimilar, a kindred pleafure, in the deep-wrought 
diftreffes of the well-imagined fcene ? Here the 
endeavour is, to introduce whatever is dreadful 
or pathetic, whatever can harrow up the feelings, 
or extort the tear. And the deeper, and more 

tragical 



from contemplating Scenes of Biftrefs. 1 5 1 

tragical the fcene becomes, the more it agitates 
the feveral paffions of terror, grief, or pity — 
the more intenfely it delights, even the mod 
polifhed minds. They feem to enjoy the various 
and vivid emotions of contending pafnons. 
They love to have the tear trembling in the eye, 
and to feel the whole foul rapt in thrilling fenfa- 
tions. For that moment, they feem to forget 
the fiction ; and afterwards commend that exhi- 
bition moft, in which they mod entirely loft 
fight of the author, and of their own fituation, 
and were alive to all the unutterable vibrations 
of ftrong or melting fenfibility. 

Taking it, then, for granted, that in the con- 
templation of many fcenes of diftrefs, both imagi- 
nary and real, a gratification is felt, let us en- 
deavour to account for it, by mentioning fome 
of thofe principles, woven into the web of human 
nature, by its benevolent Creator, on which 
that gratification depends. 

Dr. Akenfide, with his accuftomed ftrength 
and brilliancy of colouring, defcribes^ and accounts 
for it, in the following manner. I will make 
no apology for the length of the quotation. 

.. „.-._" Behold the ways 

Of heaven's eternal deftiny to man! 

For even juft, benevolent, and wife ! 

That virtue's awful fteps, howe'er purfued 

By vexing fortune, and intrunve pain, 

Should never be divided from her chart, 

Her fair attendant, pleasure. Need I urge 

h 2 Thy 



152 Br. Barnes on the Pleqfurefometimes fell 

Thy tardy thought, through all the various round 

Of this exillence, that thy foftening foul 

At length may learn, what energy the hand 

Of virtue mingles in the bitter tide 

Of passion, fvvelling with diftrefs and pain, 

To mitigate the (harp, with gracious drops 

Of cordial pleasure. Afk the faithful youth, 

Why the cold urn of her, whom long he loved, 

So often fills his arm ? So often draws 

His lonely footfteps, at the filent hour, 

To pay the mournful tribute of his tears ? 

O ! he will tell thee, that the wealth of worlds 

Should ne'er feduce his bofom to forego 

That facred hour, when, ftealing from the noife 

Of care and envy, Jkvect remembrance fooths, 

With virtue's kinder! looks, his aching breaft, 

And turns his tears to rapture. Alk the croud, 

Which flies impatient from the village- walk 

To climb the neighbouring cliffs, when far below 

The cruel winds have hurled upon the coaft 

Some helplefs bark: whilft facred pity melts 

The general eye, or Terror's icy hand 

Smites their diftorted limbs, or horrent hair, 

While every mother clofer to her breaft 

Catches her child; and, pointing where the waves 

Foam through the (nattered veffel, fhrieks aloud, 

As one poor wretch, that fpreads his piteous arms 

For fuccour, fwallowed by the roaring furge, 

As now another, daftied againft the rock, 

Drops lifelefs down. O deemeft thou indeed 

No kind endearment here, by nature given, 

To mutual terror, and compafiion's tears ? 

No fweetly melting foftnefs, which attracts 

O'er all that edge of pain, the facial powers, 

To this their proper adion, and their end i" 



The 



from contemplating Scenes ofDifirefs. 153 

The Poet purfues the fentiment in the fame ani- 
mated imagery, defcribing the ftrong, but plea- 
surable fenfations, which the foul feels, in tead^ 
ing the fufferings of heroes, who nobly died 
in the caufe of liberty, and their country : 

«« When the pious band 

Of youths, who fought for freedom, and their fires, 
Lie fide by fide in gore." 

Or, in the ftrong movements of indignation 
and revenge againft the tyrant, who invades thac 
Jiberty, and enflaves that country. 

" When the patriot's tear 

Starts from thine eye, and thy extended arm 

In fancy hurls the thunderbolt of Jove, 

To fire the impious wreath on Philip's brow, 

Or dam Oclavius from his trophied car; 

Say — Does thy fecret foul repine to tafte 

The big dijlrefs ? Or, would'lt thou then exchange 

Thofe heart-ennobling forrowos for the lot 

Of him, who fits amid the gaudy herd 

Of mute barbarians, bending to his nod, 

And bears aloft his gold-in veiled front, 

And fays within himfelf," " I am a King, 

And wherefore fhould the clamorous voice of woe 

Intrude upon mine ear?" 

The fentiment of this charming and moral poet 
is, that fympathetic feelings are virtuous, and 
therefore pleafant. And from the whole, he de- 
duces this important conclufion ; that every vir- 
tuous emotion muft be agreeable, and that this 
is the Janclion^ and the reward of virtue. The 

thought 



i $4 Dr. Barnes on the Pleafures fome times felt 

thought is amiable. The conclufion noble. But 
ftill the folution appears to me to be imperfeft. 

We have already faid, that the pleafure arifing 
from the contemplation of diftrefsful fcenes is a 
compounded feeling, arifing from feveral diftincTh 
fources in the human bread:. The kind and 
degree of the fenfation muft depend upon the 
various blendings of the feveral ingredients, 
which enter into the compofition. The caufe 
afligned by Mr. Addifon, the fenfe of our own 
fecurity, may be fuppofed to have fome Ihare in 
the mafs of feelings. That of Dr. Akenfide may- 
be allowed to have a ftill larger proportion; — Let 
us attempt to trace fome of the reft. 

There are few principles in human nature of 
more general and important influence, than 
that of sympathy. A late ingenious writer, 
led by the fafliionable idea of Amplifying all the 
fprings of human nature into one fource, has, in 
his beautiful Theory of Moral Sentiments, en- 
deavoured to analyfe a very large number of the 
feelings of the heart into fympathetic vibration. 
Though it appears to me moft probable, that the 
human mind, like the human body, poflefTes va- 
rious and difintl fprings, of action and of happi- 
nefs, yet he has fhewn, in an amazing diverfity of 
inftances, the operation and importance of this 
principle of human nature. Let us apply it to 
our prefent fubject. 

We 



from contemplating Scenes ofDiJlrefs. 155 

We naturally fympathize with the pafllons of 
others. But, if the paflions they appear to feel 
be not thofe of mere dijlrefs alone ; if, amidft fcenes 
of calamity, they difplay fortitude, generofity, 
and forgivenefs ; if, <c rifing fuperior to the 
cloud of ills which covers them," they nobly 
ftand firm, collected, and patient j here, a flill 
higher fource of pleafure opens upon us, from 
complacence, admiration, and that unutterable 
fympathy, which the heart feels with virtuous 
and heroic minds. By the operation of this 
principle, we place ourfelves in their fituation; 
we feel, as it were, fome (hare of that confcious 
integrity and peace, which they mud enjoy. 
Hence, as before obferved, the pleafure will 
vary, both as to its nature, and degree, according 
to the Jcene and characters before us. The fhock 
of contending armies in the field, — the ocean 
wrought to tempeft, and covered with the wreck 
of fhattered vefTels, — and a worthy family filently, 
yet nobly bearing up, againft a multitude of fur- 
rounding forrows, will excite very different emo- 
tions, becaufe the component parts of the plea- 
furable fenfation confift of very different mate- 
rials. They all excite admiration ; but admi- 
ration, how diverfified, both as to its degree, and 
its cau/e! Thefe feveral ingredients may, doubt- 
lefs, be fo blended together, that the pleafure 
fhall make but a very fmall part of the mixed 
fenfation. The more agreeable tints may bear 

little 



i $6 Dr. Barnes on the Pleafure Jometlmes felt 

little proportion to the terrifying red, or the 
gloomy black. 

In many of the infiances which have been 
mentioned, the pleafure mud arife chiefly, if not 
folely, from the circumftances, or accompaniments, 
of the fcene. The fublime feelings, excited by 
the view of an agitated ocean, relieve and foften 
thofe occafioned by the fhipwreck.. And the 
awe, excited by the prefence of thoufiinds of men, 
acting as with one foul, and difplaying magnani- 
mity and frmnefs, in the mod iblemn trial, 
tempers thofe fenfations of horror and of pain, 
which would arife from the field of battle. 

The gratification we are attempting to account 
for, depends alfo, in a very considerable degree, 
upon a principle of human nature, implanted in 
it for the wifeft ends j the exercise which it 
gives to the mind, by roufing it to energy, and 
fee ling. Nothing is fo infupportable, as that 
languor and ennui, for the full exprefiion of 
which, our language does not afford a term t 
How agreeable it is, to have the foul called 
forth to exertion and fenfibility, let the Gamefter 
witnefs, who, unable to endure the larTitude and 
iamenefs of unanimated luxury, runs with eager- 
nefs to the place, where probably, await him 
all the irritation and agony of tumultuous 
paflions. 

Again j It is a law of our nature, That oppo- 
fite paffions, when felt in Jucceffwn, and, above 

41, 



from contemplating Scenes ofD'ifirefs. 157 

all, when felt at the fame moment, heighten and 
increafe each other. Eafe fucceeding pain, cer- 
tainty after (ulpenfe, friendfnip after averfion, 
are unfpeakaHy ilronger, than if they had not 
been thus con crafted. In this conflict of feelings, 
the mind rifes from faffive to aSive energy. It 
is roufed to intenfe fenfation ; and it enjoys 
that peculiar, exquifite, and complex feeling, in 
which, as in many articles of our table, the acid 
and the fweet, the pleafurable and painful pun- 
gencies are fo happily mixed together, as to 
render the united fenfation amazingly more 
flrong and delightful. 

We have not yet mentioned the principle of 
curiosity, that bufy and active power, which, 
appears fo early, continues almoft unimpaired 
fo long, and to which, for the wifeft ends, is 
annexed fo great a fenfe of enjoyment. To this 
principle, rather than to a love of cruelty, would 
I afcribe that pleafure, which children fometimes 
feem to feel, from torturing flies, and leffer 
animals. They have not yet formed an idea of the 
pain they inflict. It is, indeed, of unfpeakable 
confequence, that this practice be checked, as 
foon and as effectually as pofllble, becaufe it 
is fo important, that they learn to conned the 
ideas of pleafure and pain, with the motions 
and actions of the animal creation. And, to this 
principle may we alfo refer, no fmall fhare of 
that pleafure in the contemplation of diftrefsful 

fcenes-, 



158 Dr. Barnes on the "Pleajure Jometimes felt, &c. 

fcenes, the fprings of which, in the human heart, 
we are now endeavouring to open. 

To curiosity, then — -to sympathy— to men- 
tal exertion— to the idea of our own security 
—and to the strong feelings occafioned by 
viewing the abiions and pajfions of mankind in 
interlsting situations, do we afcribe that 
gratification) which the mind feels from the 
furvey of many fcenes of forrow. We have 
called it a pleasure; but it will approach 
towards, or recede from pleasure, according to 
the nature, and proportion of the ingredients, of 
which the fenfation is compofed. In Jome cafes, 
pain will predominate. In others, there will 
be exquifite enjoyment. 

The final cauje of this conftitution of the human 
mind is probably, that by means of this ftrong 
fenfation, the foul may be preferved in continual 
and vigorous motion — that its feelings may be 
kept lively and tender — that it may learn, to 
praftife the virtues it admires — and to affift thofe 
to whom its fympathy can reach — and that it 
may thus be led, by thefe focial exercifes of the 
heart, to foften with compaffion— to expand with 
benevolence — and generoufly to afiift in every 
cafe, in which affiftance can be given. An end 
this fufficient, 

» . << To afTert eternal Providence, 

And juftify the ways of God to man." 

Observa- 



Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 159 



Observations on Blindness, and on the Employ- 
ment of the other Senjes to Jupply the Loss of 
Sight. By Mr. Bew. Read April 17 , 178 2. 

tenebrafque necefle 'ft 

Non radii folis, neque lucida tela diei 
Difcutiant Lucret. 

AMONGST the various accidents and cala- 
mities, to which the human fpecies are 
fubjected, there are none that excite companion, 
or call forth our benevolent aid more power- 
fully, than blindlefs. The blind man, in 
all ages and countries, has ever been allowed 
an indifputable claim on the good offices of 
his fellow- creatures ; his neceffities have gene- 
rally been fupplied with facred care j and his 
genius, if it approached to excellence, has been 
refpe&ed with a degree of reverence, fuperior to 
what is ufually beftowed, on fuch as are poffefTed 
of the faculty of fight. 

The faculty of fight, indeed, is juftly consi- 
dered as fuperior to any of the other fenfes. Hear- 
ing, tafting, and fmelling, when compared with 
vifion, appear very limited in their powers and 
determinations ; and though the fenfe of touch 
may poffefs the mod general, and accurate power 
of conveying the ideas of the various modifica- 
tions 



j6o Mr. Sew on Blindnefsi 

tions of matter to the mind; yet the compre- 
henfivenefs, together with the inftantaneous cele- 
rity, with which vifion difplays to us the won- 
ders of Nature, or the varieties of Art, far tran- 
fcend any of the perceptions, that the touch, or 
the other fenfes are able to furnifh us with. It 
is, perhaps, on this account, that we figuratively 
employ the term, feeing, in acknowledging the 
confcious evidence of reafon and truth ; and even 
extend the application! as the mod expreflive, 
to one of the diftinguilbing attributes of Al- 
mighty perfection. 

In no part of the human fabric, or even 
throughout the whole of nature, with which we 
are acquainted, are there more evident marks 
of exquifite perfection and wifdom, than in what 
relates to the fenfe of feeing; whether we direct 
our attention to the wonderful regularity, order, 
minutenefs, and velocity of the rays of light, 
which minifter to this fenfe, or to the ftruclure 
and formation of the little organ, in which this 
faculty is deftined to refide. "With a ball and 
<c focket, (as a learned and elegant Phiioibpher,* 
" beautifully obferves) of an inch diameter, we 
" are enabled, in an inftant of time, without 
w changing our place, to perceive the difpofition 
" of an army, the figure of a palace, and the 
" variety of a landfcape j" and not only, as he 
farther rema-ks, to " find our way through the 

* Dr. Reid, p. lii. 

pathlefs 



(C 



Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 1S1 

<e pathlefs ocean, traverfe the globe of the earth, 
" determine its figure and dimenfions, and deli- 
" neate every region of it :" But, 

" Breaking hence, take our ardent flight 

" Thro' the blue infinite," 

fifcertain the order, revolutions and diftances of 
the planetary orbs, and even form probable con- 
jectures on 

. t< Every ftar 

'* Which the clear concave of a winter's night 

" Pours on the eye, or aftronomic tube, 

M Far flretchitig, fnatches from the dark abyfs." 

Thomson. 

In contemplating, therefore, the extenfive and 
almoft unlimited properties of vifion, we not 
only find our gratitude warmed and elevated 
to piety and devotion, but are, likewife, con- 
fcious of an involuntary impulfe, that urges us 
to exert our endeavours, towards the affiftance of 
fuch as are unfortunately deprived of this noble 
faculty, whenever they are prefented to our 
notice. 

And here, again* we have every motive to 
infpire us with admiration of the providential 
wifdom and benevolence, difplayed by the divine 
Author of our exiftence. For, notwithstanding 
the great and comprehenfive powers of fight, 
there is little of the actual knowledge acquired 

Vol. I. M by 



1 6z Mr. Bew on Blindnefs'. 

by this faculty, that may not, by attentive and 
patient perfeverance, be communicated to the 
man who has been doomed to darknefs fr^m his 
birth. The bigot, or the enthufiaft, who con- 
demns the refearches of philofophy, and errone- 
oufly pronounces them to be incompatible with 
religion; perceives, with aftonifhment, the blind 
enabled to expatiate on light or colours ; on 
reflection, refraction, and on the various fub- 
jects, from which we might naturally fuppofe 
they would be excluded, by the deprivation 
of fight j and fatisfies himfelf with abruptly 
referring the whole to the immediate difpen- 
fation of the Deity. The philofopher, on the 
other hand, though, with willing fubmifiion, he 
ultimately attributes the effects to Omnipotence; 
is, neverthelefs, defirous to avoid the cenfure 
paflfed on the fervant, " who buried his talent in 
a napkin ;" and ventures to exert the abilities with 
which he may be endowed in endeavouring to 
inveftigate the means by which the effects are 
ordained 'to be accomplished, to the end, that 
the interefts of humanity may be ferved with 
greater certainty. 

The powerful influence of exercife and habit 
upon the intellectual, as well as upon the 
corporeal faculties, are too w^ll known and 
acknowledged, to require much illustration. 
The mufcles, of any part of the body, acquire 
peculiar vigour and fullnefs by habitual exer- 
cife; 



Mr. Bew on BUndnefs. 16$ 

cife ; and the fame is remarkable, though in 
a ftill higher degree, with refped to the effe&s 
of exercife and habit, on the faculties of the 
mind. From this wife regulation, in the ceco- 
nomy of nature, refults a train of refources, 
which the blind are found capable of deriving 
from the exercife of the other fenfes j and which 
may be fo far perfected, as to compenfate, in 
a great meafure, for the lofs of the darling fenfe 
of fight. The delicacy and precision, with which 
fome eminent blind people have employed the 
other fenfes, particularly bearing and touch, would, 
indeed, exceed the bounds of credibility, were 
we not allured of the fads, as well from adlual 
experience, as from undoubted authorities. 

Dr. Saunderfon loft his fight, by the fmall- 
pox, fo early in his infancy, that he did not 
remember to have ever fcen. He had no more 
ideas of light, than if he had been born blind. 
Notwithftanding this misfortune, he acquired 
filch profound and perfed knowledge in the 
fcience of mathematics, that, by the influence 
of his merit only, he was appointed to the 
profeflbrihip in the Univerfity of Cambridge. 
The addrefs of this celebrated philofopher, was 
no ways inferior to the knowledge he poiTeiTed j 
a circumftance, which we do not always meet 
with in thofe who have the full powers of 
fight. His ledures on the different branches 
of mathematics, natural philofophy, aflronomy, 

M * and 



1 64 Mr. Beiv on Blindnefs. 

and optics, were remarkably clear and intelligible",. 
Fully aware of the difficulties young minds have 
to contend with, from the abftrufenefs in which 
the fubje&s of natural philofophy are ufually 
involved, his endeavours were fuccefsfully 
directed to obviate and remove thefe obfrructions •, 
and to furnifh. a method, at the fame time, 
comprehenfive, natural, and eafy to be under- 
ftood. 

Dr. Saunderfon's fenfation of touch, as is ufual 
with blind people, was very exquifite -, and it 
was by means of this fenfe, that he acquired many 
of his principal ideas. He diftinguifhed, with 
aftonifhing nicety, the peculiar properties of 
bodies, that depended on the roughnefs or fmooth- 
nefs of their furfaces. A remarkable inftance 
is given of his nice accuracy in this refpeft. 
A feries of Roman medals, fomc of which were 
true, and others falfr, were prefented to his 
touch. Dr. Saunderfon, by running his fingers 
over them, was foon able to dillinguifh the 
genuine antiques, from thofr that were counter- 
feited ; though the latter had been executed, 
with fuch exa&nefs of imitation, as to deceive 
a connoififeur, who only judged by the eye. Bur, 
fays the profeflbr, cc I, who had not that fenfe 
<{ to truft to, could eafily feel a roughnefs in the 
" new caft, fufficient to diftinguifh them by." 

The imprefTion made by the approach of 
bodies nearer to him, or their being removed 

farther 



Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 165 

farther off; and the different dates of the 
atmofphere, were diftinguilhabie to him by 
the fame delicate fenfe of touch ; and his fenfe 
of hearing was refined to a fimilar degree of 
perfection. He could readily afcertain the fifth 
part of a note of mufic. He not only diftin- 
guifhed and remembered the different people 
he Converfed with, by the peculiar founds of 
their voices, but, in fome meafure, places 
alio. Judging by the founds of the pavements, 
of the courts and piazzas, and the reflection 
of thefe founds from the walls, he remembered 
the different variations, fo as to be able to 
recollect the places, pretty exactly, when con- 
ducted to them afterwards. 

We might produce a great variety of inftances, 
both antient and modern, where blind perfons 
have excelled in different departments of fciencej 
and particularly, in the feveral branches of 
mathematics. * But the attachment, which thefe 

unfortunate 

* Diodotus, the preceptor cf Cicero, is reprefented as 
attaching himfelf, with greater affiduity to the Science of 
Mathematics after he became blind. 

" Diodotus Stoicus, excus multos annos, noftrae domi 
" vixit : is vero, quod credibile vix effet, cum in Philo- 
f fophia multo etiam magis affidue quam antea verfaretur 
" turn quod fine occulis fieri poftit. Geometria: munus tueba- 
" tur, precipiens difecntibus, unde, quo, quamque lineam 
t« fcriberent." Cic. Tufc. difp. L. V. 39. 

M 3 Didymua 



1 66 Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 

unfortunate people difplay, for the pleafing pur- 
suits of mufic and poetry, is ftill more general. 
The powerful influence of verbal expreffion, when 
communicated to the blind, in the form of poetry, 
and the congenial ideas it infpires, are really afto- 
nifhino-. Of this we have a recent proof in Dr. 
Blacklock of Edinburgh. This amiable gentle- 
man was, I believe, either born blind, or became 
fo very foon after his birth : yet., we find no defects, 
in thofe beautiful poems he has exhibited to the 
world, that can be attributed to his want of fight; 
on the contrary, we meet with defcriptions of 
vifual fcenes and objects, as beautiful, expreffive, 
and juft, as if he had actually been poffeffed of the 
faculty of feeing; and had drawn his defcriptions, 
from an enraptured furvey of the variegated prof- 
pects of nature. Whereas, we muft be convinced, 
when we accurately confider the matter, that the 
poetic enthufiafm, which infpired him, and excited 
thefe imitative powers, could only be produced 
by the various combination of founds, which were 
conveyed, by words, to his imagination. 

The influence of mufic is ftill more generally 
to be obferved than that of poetry. Mufic, almoft 

Bidymus of Alexandria, is celebrated by St. Jerom and 
the hiflorian Cafliodorus, as a prodigy in logic and mathe- 
matics, though blind from his infancy. The latter writer, 
likewife fpeaks of one Eufebius, an Afiatic, who, though 
blind, diilinguifhed himfelf highly in all kinds of 
learning. 

without 



Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 167 

without exception, appears to be the favourite 
amufement of the blind. There is no other em- 
ployment of the mind, religious contemplation 
excepted, that feems fo well adapted to footh. 
the foul, and diffipate the melancholy ideas, which, 
it may naturally be expected, will fometimes 
pervade the difpofitions of thofe who are utterly 
bereft of fight. This, together with the beneficial 
influence that refults from the practice of this 
delightful art, by quickening and perfecting the 
fenfc of hearing, is a matter that deferves the mod 
ferious attention. The celebrated Profeffor, juft 
now -mentioned, excelled in performing on the 
flute, in his youth ; and the refinement of his 
ear, has been very juftly attributed to his early 
attention to mufic. It is not, therefore, furprizing 
that fo many blind people have diftinguifhed 
themfelves in this fcience. Stanley and Parry 
were deprived of their fight in early infancy; 
yet both thefe Gentlemen have difplayed extra- 
ordinary proofs of their abilities, not only as 
compofers and performers of mufic, but, like- 
wife, in matters that, at a firft view, we might 
be apt to confider as peculiar to thofe who are 
fully poflfcfTed of the faculty of vifion. Their 
feparate reputations, as muficians, are fufficiently 
known and acknowledged. The ftile of Stanley 
is truly his own ; and his execution on the organ, 
equal, if not fuperior to any of his cotemporary 
performers on that grand instrument. Parry may 

M 4 be 



168 Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 

be revered as the Britifh bard of modern times. 
The halls of the Cambrian Chief refound with 
the melodious vibrations of his harp, and he has 
united the refinements of tafte and elegance to the 
rude, but expreflive modulations of antiquity. 

I pafs over a number of inftances, that might 
be offered to your notice, and proceed to give 
fome account of Dr. Henry Moyes, the elegant 
reader on philofophical chemiftry •, whofe lec- 
tures, the greateft part of this fociety had the 
fatisfacYion of attending, and whofe perfonal 
acquaintance feveral of us have enjoyed 

This intelligent philofopher, like the cele- 
brated profefibr of Cambridge before-mentioned, 
loft his fight, by the fmall-pox, in his early in- 
fancy. He never recolle&ed to have feen : " but 
" the fir ft traces of memory I have," fays he, " are 
* c in fome confufed ideas of the folar fyftem." 
He had the good fortune to be born in a country 
where learning of every kind is highly culti- 
vated, and to be brought up in a family devoted 
to learning. 

Pofiefled of native genius, and ardent in his, 
application, he made rapid advances in va- 
rious departments of erudition ; and not only 
acquired the fundamental principles of mecha- 
nics, mufic, and the languages; but, like- 
wife entered deeply into the inveftigation of the 
profounder fciences; and difplayed an acute 

an<4 



Mr. Bew on Blindnefs, 16$ 

and general knowledge of geometry, optics, 
algebra; of aftronomy, chemiftry ; and, in fhort, 
of moft of the branches of the Newtonian phi- 
lofophy. 

Mechanical exercifes were the favourite em- 
ployments of his infant years. At a very early 
age, he made himfelf acquainted with the ufe of 
edged tools, fo perfectly, that, notwithstanding 
his intire blindnefs, he was able to make little 
wind-mills ; and, he even conftrufled a loom, 
with his own hands, which ftill fhew the cica- 
trices of wounds, he received in the execution of 
thefe juvenile exploits. 

By a moft agreeable intimacy, and frequent 
intercourfe, which f enjoyed, with this accom- 
plished blind Gentleman, whilft he refided in 
Manchester; I had an opportunity of repeatedly 
obferving the peculiar manner, in which he 
arranged his ideas, and acquired his information. 
Whenever he was introduced into company, I 
remarked, that he continued fome timefilcnt. The 
found dire&ed him to judge of the dimenfions of 
the room, and the different voices, of the number 
of perfons that were prefent. His distinction, in 
thefe refpects, was very accurate ; and his memory 
fo retentive, that he feldom was miftaken. I 
have known him inftantly recognize a perfon, 
on firft hearing him fpeak, though more than 
two years had elapfrd fince the time of their laft 
meeting. He determined, pretty nearly, the 

ftature 



170 Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 

ftature of thofe he was fpeaking with, by the 
direction of their voices ; and he made tolerable 
conjectures, reflecting their tempers and dif- 
pofitions, by the manner jn which they conducted 
their converfation. 

It muft be obferved, that this Gentleman's 
eyes were not totally infenfible to intenfe light. 
The rays refracted through a prifm, when fuffi- 
ciently vivid, produced certain diftinguifliable 
effects on them. The red gave him a difagreea-? 
able fenfation, which he compared to the touch 
of a faw. As the colours declined in violence, 
the harfhnefs leffened, until the green afforded 
a fenfation that was highly pleafing to him j 
and which he defcribed, as conveying an idea 
fimilar to what he felt, in running his hand over 
fmooth poliihed furfaces. Polifhed furfaces, 
meandering ftreams, and gentle declivities, 
were the figures, by which he exprefied his ideas 
of beauty. Rugged rocks, irregular points, and 
boifterous elements, furnilhed him with expref? 
fions for terror and difguft. He excelled in the 
charms of converfation j was happy in his 
aljufions to vifual obje&s ; and difcourfed on 
the nature, compofition, and beauty of colours, 
with pertinence and precifion. 

Doctor Moyes was a ftriking inftance of the 
power, the human foul poffefles, of finding re-» 
fources of fatisfaction, even under the mod rigo- 
rous calamities. Though involved "in ever during 

darknefs, 



Mr. Bew on Blitidnefs, 171 

darknefs," and excluded from the charming views 
of filent or animated nature ; though dependent 
on an undertaking for the means of his fub- 
fiftence, the fuccefs of which was very precarious ; 
in fhort, though deftitute of other fupport than 
his genius, and under the mercenary protection 
of a perfon, whofe integrity he fufpected — ftill 
Dr. Moyes was generally chearful and apparently 
happy. Indeed it mult afford much pleafure to 
the feeling heart to obferve this hilarity of 
temper prevail, almoftuniverfally, with the blind. 
Though tc cut off from the ways of men, and 
the contemplation of the human face divine;'* 
they have this confolation; they are exempt 
from the difcernment, and contagious influence, 
of thofe painful emotions of the foul, that are 
vifible on the countenance, and which hyporrify 
itfelf can fcarcely conceal. This difpoficion, like- 
wife, may be confidered, as an internal evidence 
of the native worth of the human mind ; that thus 
fupports its dignity and chearfulnefs under one 
of the fevereft misfortunes that can pofTibly 
befall us. Nor is this chearful refignation pecu* 
liar to thofe who have been blind from their 
birth; we find it, alfo, generally prevail with 
fuch as have loft their fight, even at a more 
advanced age; and who mull, undoubtedly, feel 
the misfortune with the utmoit anguilh. The 
diftrefTing recollection, which memofy mud 
prefent, of former enjoyments, we find, however, 

foon 



172 Mr. Be-w on Blindnefs. 

foon fubfides. Gentler and more pleafing reflec-. 
tions fucceed. Contemplation takes her refidence 
in her proper province, the human mind ; and 
the blind, fubmifiively and chearfully refign 
themfelves to the will of Heaven, and the 
benevolent protection of the lefs unfortunate 
of their fellow-creatures. And hard, indeed, 
is the heart of him, who will not ftretch out 
his hand to fuccour the blind ; or who, by 
injustice, illiberahty, or unkindnefs, adds a 
fling to the confeious dependence, to which, 
whilft they live, they mull ever be fiibjedled. 

The blind people I have hitherto felecled to 
fpeak of, it may be remarked, were fuch as had 
their native faculties excited and matured by 
early and attentive education. But we mall find, 
even where education has been wanting, and the 
blind left, in a great meafure, to the fimple ex- 
ertions of nature ; that the natural faculties them- 
felves make furpriz'mg efforts towards fupplying 
the deficiency of fight. I fhall bring forwards to 
your notice a perfon, well known in this neigh- 
bourhood, of which he is a native. This is 
one John Metcalf, who, like the Gentlemen 
already mentioned, became blind at a very early 
age, fo as to be intirely unconfeious of light and 
its various effects. This man paMed the younger 
part of his life as a waggoner, and occafionally s 
as a guide in intricate roads during the night, or 
when the tracks were covered with fnow. Strange 

35 



Mr. Bert on BlindnefJ. 173 

as this may appear to thofe who can fee, the em- 
ployment he has fince undertaken is ftill more ex- 
traordinary : it is one of the lad to which we could 
fuppofe a blind man would ever turn his attention. 
His prefent occupation is that of a projector and 
furveyor of highways in difficult and mountainous 
parts. With the aififtance only of a long ftaff, I 
have feveral times met this man traverfing the 
roads, afcending precipices, exploring valleys, and 
inveftigating their feveral extents, forms, and 
filiations, fa as to anfwer his defigns in the beft 
manner. The plans which he defigns, and the 
eftimates he makes, are done in a method peculiar 
to himfelf; and which he cannot well convey the 
meaning of to others. His abilities, in this refpect, 
are, neverthelefs, fo great, that he finds conftant 
employment. Mod of the roads over the Peak 
in Derbyshire, have been altered by his directions; 
particularly thofe in the vicinity of Buxton : and 
he is, at this time, conftru&ing a new one, betwixt 
Wilmflow and Congleton, with a view to open a 
communication to the great London road, with- 
out being obliged to pafs over the mountains. * 

Thefe 

* Since this paper was written, and had the honour of 
being delivered to the Society, I have met this blind pro- 
jector of the roads, who was alone as ufual ; and amongil 
other converfation, I made fonie inquiries rcfpccling this 
new road. It was really altonilhing to hear with what 
accuracy he described the courfes, and the nature of the 

different 



174 Mr. Bezo on Blinctnefs. 

Thefe inftances will, I am perfuaded, be fuffici- 
ent to prove, how effectually, by proper exercife, 
the other fenfes may be refined and perfected, 
fo as, in many refpects, to fupply the lofs of 
fight. The fenfations of fmell and talte, indeed, 
are {o very limited, that they do not feem 
capable of yielding many peculiar advantages to 
blind people : but the perceptions of hearing 
and touch, as we have feen, may be applied to 
purpofes wonderfully extenfive. 

By the nice diftincYion of touch and found, 
the blind man not only acquires knowledge 
with refpect to perfons and fituations j is not 
only warned from danger, and excited to plea- 
furej but by means of thefe delicate faculties, 
he is enabled to conceive many of the vifual 
qualities of bodies, and to diftinguifh them with 
certain precifion. I do not mean to infer, that 
a blind man annexes the fame ideas to vifual 
qualities, as are excited in the minds of thofe 
who are poffeffed of the perfect faculty of fight. 
I only wifh to obferve, that he forms a general 
conception of their characters, by the analogy 
which he finds they bear to qualities he is ac- 

different foils, through which it was conducted. Having 
mentioned to him a boggy piece of ground it patted through, 
he obferved, that " that was the only place he had doubts 
" concerning ; and that he was apprehenfive they had, 
" contrary tc. his- directions, been too fparing of their 
" materials." 

quainted 



Mr. Bsiv on Blindnefs. 175 

quainted with, by means of his other fenfes. 
Thus, for example, if we prefent a violet to him, 
and demand of him what ideas he has of its 
qualities; he will be able to anfwer with great 
precifion reflecting its fmell, &c. which, as 
well as the name of the violet are foft, fweet, 
and pleafing. But, with regard to the colour, 
he will be wholly unable to conceive any idea 
of it, except what takes place from very diftanc 
analogies : the plaintive melody of the flute, the 
foft fmoothnefs of furfaces, &c. In like man- 
ner, by appofite affociations, he may compare 
the intenfe colour of fcarlet to the glow of a fur- 
nace, the noife of a trumpet, or the odour of 
aromatics ; becaufe they feverally affect his fenfes 
with intenfe excitements. 

But whatever amazing information, the fenfes 
of hearing and touch, may afford the blind ; thefe 
powers would, neverthelefs, be tranfient and 
ineffectual, were not the impreffions and ideas 
they excite in the mind, preferved and matured 
by the afTiftance of the memory. It is chiefly 
by the affiftance of the memory, that the blind 
acquire the exquifite advantages, derived frorri 
the other fenfes. In this refpect, providential 
benevolence feems to have determined the 
gre-ueft compenfation, for the fevere deprivation 
oi the fenfe of fight. The foul of the blind man, 
fcridiffracted by the never ceafing variety which. 
is always prefent to the organs of vifion, when 

awake, 



i~}6 Mr. Bern on Blindnefr. 

awake, purfues its internal perceptions and con- 
templations with unconfounded ferenity. The 
blind unlettered projector of roads could reply 
to me, when I exprefTed myfelf furprized at the 
accuracy of his difcriminations, " that there was 
" nothing furprizing in the matter ; You, Sir," 
fays he, tc can have recourfe to your eye fight 
*' whenever you want to fee or examine any 
<c thing j whereas, I have only my memory to 
<c truft to. There is one advantage, how- 
* c ever," he remarked, that he pofTefied. <f The 
<c readinefs with which you view an object at 
" pleafure, prevents the neceffity of fixing 
" the ideas of it deeply in your mind, and the 
" impreffions, in general, become quickly obli- 
cc terated. On the contrary, the information I 
" pofTefs, being acquired with greater difficulty, 
" is, on that very account, fo firmly fixed on the 
" memory, as to be almoft indelible." Such, 
indeed, is the wonderful influence, refulting 
from the union of exercife and habit, on the 
faculties of the blind, that the permanency of 
their knowledge in a great meafure, compen- 
fates for the labour required in its attainment ! 

The inftantaneous facility, with which, by the 
aid of fight, we are able to afcertain the pecu- 
liarities of any place we furvey, and the eafe 
with which we review and recognize them, 
renders dependence on the memory, to us, lefs 
neceffary. For inftance, the dimenfions of the 

apartment 



Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 177 

apartment I fit in ; the furniture, &c. will, 
by the organs of vifion, be immediately prefented 
to the mind of any ftranger who may call on me, 
fo that he will be able, in a moment, to recollect 
the whole whenever he repeats his vifit, to the fame 
place. This kind of information can only be ac- 
quired by the blind man, in confequence of the 
moft patient attention. He is to be led round 
the feveral parts of the room, his finger conducted 
to the furfaces of the furniture, pictures, &c. 
before he can poffibly form any idea with refpect 
to the place. But when, by means of the per- 
ceptions of touch, and a neceffary degree of 
information, he conceives a regular train of 
diftinguifhing ideas, his mind affociates them, 
with fuch tenacity, that he feldom has occafion 
to repeat his inquiries. 

It is this accurate and retentive power of the 
memory, that enables the blind mathematician 
to make exact calculations and inferences ; to 
work problems in algebra, and in infinite feries j 
to conceive, with precifion, the different effects 
that bodies muft produce to the fight, by their 
being nearer or farther off; by their moving 
in a ftraight or in an oblique line; and, that 
directs his inveftigation with refpect. to the prin- 
ciples of projection, and the various rules of 
perfpective. 

It muft here be remarked, that though the 
blind man may conceive the properties of figure 

Vol. I. N and 



I j 8 Mr. Betv en Blindnefs. 

and extenfion with certain accuracy ; yet it docf 
not follow that he would be able to diftinguifh 
them, with the fame certainty, by vifion, provided 
that faculty were, immediately, beftowed on him. 
On the contrary, the queition ftarted by Mr. 
Molineux, * was found to prove exactly as 
that philofopher expected, in the extraordinary 
cafe of a blind youth, whom Mr. Chefelden had 
the good fortune to bring to fight, by couching, 
at thirteen years of age. This young man, at 
his firft. feeling the irnprefiions of objects on the 
organs of vifion, imagined every thing he faw 
touched his eyes ; nor was he able to difcriminate 
one object from another, however different their 
forms. When things that were before known 
to him, by touching, were prefented to him* 
he confidered them attentively, in order to 
recognize them j but on a fudden, he felt 
kimfelf confufed, from the multitude of objects 
that crowded for admifiion, and the whole was 
involved in obfeurity. It appears, therefore, 
from the above fact, as well as from a due 
examination of the fubject, that thofe who 
make ufe of their eyes, for the firft time, fee 
only furfaces and colours ; and have no con- 
ception of the vifible effects of light and pro- 
jection, until they learn it from experience. 
In fact, if we carefully attend to the opera-* 
tion of our own minds, we fhall find, that the 

* Lock en the Underftanding, vol. I. p. 107. 

vifiblc 



Mr. Bew on Blindnefs. 179 

vifible appearances of objects are feldom accu- 
rately attended to, unlefs we are employed in 
delineating thofe objects. The vifible appear- 
ance of things, is varied according to the direc- 
tion of the light, the pofition, and the diftance, 
with refpect to the beholder : yet, as we are con- 
fcious from experience, of the identity, the real 
figure is conceived in its actual proportion, and 
the vifible, or perfpective, appearance is con- 
fidered only as a fign or indication. 

The accurate painter is well aware of this 
operation of the mind, and in delineating his 
objects, and relieving them with the diftribution 
of light and (hade, ;is carefully attentive to avoid 
forming conclufions, before he accurately confiders 
the premifes. The effect produced by a well 
managed picture, fufficiently evinces the actual 
appearance of bodies, according to their point 
of view; and the impreffions they muft make 
on the organs of fight, when employed previous 
to the influence of reafon, and the correction of 
the judgment. The painter, who exerts the 
imitative powers of his art to deceive the eye, 
does not merely draw the out-line of his figure, 
and colour it with the exact uniform tinge it 
naturally difplays: he furveys it in one certain 
point of view, and then proceeds to delineate 
and adapt his tints, as if the figure were, in 
reality, adhering to the canvafs. It is no won- 
der, therefore, that the young Gentleman, juft 

N 2 mentioned, 



i8o Mr. Bew on BUndriefs. 

mentioned, was aftonifhed to find, on examining 
the pictures, prefented to him, with his finger, 
that they had not the fame projection, with 
the objects they reprefented. This, as well 
as the art of diminifhing a figure, and Mill pre- 
ferving the refemblance, would evidently be as 
much an enigma, to a perfon juft pofieflcd o{ 
vifion, as the circumftance of the Mirror, men- 
tioned by M Diderot. * 

It is more than probabk, therefore, that the 
blind man, has no ideas of colour, except, as has 
been already remarked, what are derived from 
a kind of diftant analogy, regulated by the afToci- 
ating powers of the mind, and preferved by the 
memory ; and, indeed, moft of the perfons of this 
clafs I have converfed with, have frankly confeffed 
themfelves wholly ignorant of its qualities. Nor 
is this deficiency in the forming of ideas peculiar 
to the fenfe of fight. A deaf man would be juft 
as much embarrafTed, with refpedt to the qualities 
of found ; and the fame may be obferved with 
refpect to the other fenfes. 

In the courfe of my inquiries, however, on 
this fubjecl, it occurred to me, that I might 
pofilbly derive fome new matter for obfervation, 
from the recollection of the blind man's percep- 
tions whilft under the influence of his dreams. 
In the ufual filent hours of repofe, when the 

* Vid les CEuvres de M. Diderot, torn. II. Art. Lettres 
fur les Aveugles, Sec. 

exercife 



Mr. Beiv on Blindnefs. 18 1 

exercife of the memory is, in a great meafure, 
fufpended ; and the unfettered imagination dis- 
plays its powers, in a very peculiar manner j I 
conceived it might be pofiible for the blind to 
experience fome tranfient imprefiions, relative 
to vifual qualities. It is true Mr. Lock gives 
it as his opinion, " that th.e dreams of fleeping 
" men are made up of waking men's ideas j 
e « though," he allows, " they, are, for the moll 
" part, oddly put together." The imprefiions of 
dreams, it mud be acknowledged, are too fleet- 
ing to admit of much investigation j and our 
recollection of them is liable to the greateft uncer- 
tainty : yet, notwithstanding the opinion of this 
great philofopher, there are few, I am perfuaded, 
who have not felt themfelves fometimes affec~ted> 
duting their dreams, in a manner which they 
could by no means account for, or reconcile with 
any circumftance that had previoufiy taken place 
in real life. And though I have not been able 
to gratify my curiofity to its full extent, yet I 
have gained Sufficient information to convince 
me, that the blind feel imprefiions in dreaming, 
in fome degree, fimilar to the vifible appearances 
of bodies. A blind Gentleman, with whom I 
have lately convcrfed, clearly proves to me, that 
he is confeious of the figure, though he cannot 
diftinguiih the varieties of the human coun-r 
tenance : and from the confufed efforts he makes 
[0 explain him, ft: If, it may be perceived, that he 

N 3 feels, 



1B2 Mr. Beta on Blindnefs. 

feels himfelf alarmed with new fenfations, that 
bear a ftrong relation to our ideas of light and 
colour; but which he finds it impofllble to de- 
fcribe, becaufe he cannot fix on any comparative 
idea whereby to explain himfelf. Thefe dreams, 
my intelligent friend informs me, are always 
painful, and, as may naturally be expected, the 
impreffions are extremely tranfient and unfatif- 
factory. 

But it is not the blind only, who are unable 
to trace the various effects produced by light and 
colour. There are perfons, whofe organs of 
vifion are fo imperfectly formed, that they can- 
not diftinguifh colours, though they fee the objects 
perfectly. In the Philofophical Tranfactions 
we have an account of a man who knew no 
difference of colour whatever; and there is an in- 
genious perfon, within the circle, of our acquaint- 
ance, whofe knowledge in Perfpective, as well 
as in the other branches of Natural Philofophy, 
is unqueftionable ; yet who finds himfelf defici- 
ent in difcerning the difference of fome colours, 
which he knows to exitt, and v/hich are diftin- 
guimable to perfect vifion. In particular, I think 
I have heard him mention, that the fenfation 
he felt, from the colours of brown and green, 
had no obvious difference, provided they were 
diffufed with equal degrees of intenfenefs. 

But thefe fpeculations, however curious and 
entertaining, were not the principal objects I 

had " 



Mr. Bew on Blindnefs, 1S3 

had in view, when I fat down to confider the 
fubjecl of blindnefs. It may be remarked, that 
in the (ketches, relative to blind people, I have 
offered to your notice, I have purpofely avoided 
fpeaking of fuch, as had ever poffefied the fa- 
culty of vifion, fo as to recollect it with any 
degree of accuracy : and I have been the more 
particular in my account of Dr. Moyes, and the 
blind projector of roads, becaufe I had an oppor- 
tunity of availing myfclf of immediate inform- 
ation from them, with refpect to fuch pecu- 
liarities, as it was not in my power to derive from 
the writings of the few authors, who have treated 
on this fubjecl:.* In tracing the progrefs, and 
marking the degrees of perfection, to which the 
mod celebrated blind people have carried the 
exertions of the other fenfes, to fupply the lofs 
of fight ; I was perfuaded, that farther obferva- 
tions and difcoveries might be made, which might 
be applied to advantage in the education of blind 
children; and alfo in rendering more perfect, the 
different inventions, that have already been de- 
yifed, in order to facilitate their information, 
and the means of their improvement : and I 

* Befides occasional hints which I have acquired from 
converfing with various blind people, whofe names are not 
mentioned ; I have particular acknowledgments to make 
to Mr. Cheefe, the organift of the collegiate church in 
Manchdler, for the fatufaclion he has afforded me in many 
of my inquiries. 

N 4 flattered 



1 84 Mr. Majey on Saltpetre. 

flattered myfelf, that thefe matters would be 
deemed fufficiently important, to engage the 
attention of the learned members of this Society. 
Inftances too frequently occur, that mod power- 
fully call for the generofity and compaflion of 
mankind; and though our abilities rarely arrive 
at the divine perfection of giving fight to the blind y 
we (hall always experience a confcious bene- 
volent fatisfa&ion, in miniftering to their know 
ledge, their convenience and happinefs. 



A TREATISE ON SALTPETRE, 
By James Massey, Efq. 

.._.-. -fi quid novifti rettius iftis 

Candidus Imperii, fi non his utere mecura. 



INTRODUCTORY OBSERVATIONS. 

r T 1 HE great importance of Saltpetre, fince the 
invention of gun-powder, is too well known 
to be here expatiated upon, as well as the nu- 
merous rewards that have been offered to thofe 
who fhould give us the cleareft and beft accounts 
of it j a fure fign that, notwithstanding it has 

been 



Mr. Majfey en Saltpetre. 185 

been long made in very confiderable quantities 
in almoft every part of Europe, our knowledge 
cf this fait is ftill very imperfect. 

This induced the author of the following pages, 
many years ago, to turn his attention to this 
fubject, and he flatters himfelf, that, by long 
obfervation, and a practice which, though not 
very extenfive, may have been fuffkient for this 
purpofe, he has made fuch difcoveries, as may 
render the bufinefs of faltpetre-making no lefs 
eafy and familiar to his countrymen, than it has 
long been to our neighbours upon the continent. 

He never, indeed, could be brought to believe, 
that it was owing to any defect in our climate, or 
to the want of materials, that we have fo often 
failed in our attempts this way, but merely to our 
inattention to fome particular points in the prac- 
tical part, upon which our fuccefs, in a great 
meafure, depended. Thefe, therefore, he has prin- 
cipally laboured to explore, and to fet them in fo 
ftrong a light, that they can no longer efcape 
our obfervation. 

It is the cuftom of the faltpetre makers abroad, 
to wait till the earths they have procured, or pre- 
pared for this purpofe, are found fit to anfwer 
their end j a practice, which we have reafon to 
think has rarely been followed by our country- 
men, who, finding the earths they have employed, 
imperfect upon the firft trial, have feldom af* 
forced them a fecond, and thus have rejected 

many 



1 85 Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 

rnany that, in a due courfe of time, might have 
anfwered their moft Anguine expectations. 

They have, likewife, not duly attended to the 
large quantities of earth, that our neighbours are 
obliged to dixiviate, in order to obtain a fmall 
portion of faltpetrej and finding their portion but 
trifling in the trials they have made, have too 
haftily concluded this bufinefs to befcarcely worth 
following ; when, had they reflected upon the 
great number of fakpetre-makers in France and 
Germany, they muft, certainly, have entertained 
a very different opinion. 

But what has chiefly difcouraged us, we pre- 
fume, may have been, our ignorance of the true 
grounds and principles, upon which the practice 
pf making faltpetre is founded; which, we 
may obferve, have never been clearly kid open. 
All that we are told is, that faltpetre is extracted 
from the rubbifti of old houfes, the bottoms of 
ilinking pits and ditches, and the like; which 
has induced many perfons to conclude, that this 
fait is generated in thefe earths : whereas, the 
truth is, that nothing is extracted from thefe 
earths but a peculiar acid, which, in con- 
junction with the fixt fait of wood-afhes, and not 
without, forms this neutral one which cryftallizes 
in the ley when boiled down as above mentioned ; 
which circumftances being omitted, it can be no 
wonder that we are led into very great errors. 

Qf 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 187 

Of this acid, the fource from which it is de- 
rived, and the manner in which thefe and other 
earths become impregnated with it, we fhall en- 
deavour to give the mod full, and fatisfactory 
account, as well as of the practical methods of 
making faltpetre, all which might be comprized in 
a page or two, had we not a variety of chimeras 
to encounter, and this practice particularly to 
(explain. By thefe means we hope to remove 
all that myftery and obfcurity in which this fub- 
jett has been fo long involved 5 and to render the 
practice of making faltpetre as eafy and familiar 
to the Englifh, as it has long been to the French 
and Germans, fo much to the advantage of thof? 
nations. 



ON SALTPETRE. 

Th e great ufe of faltpetre in the compo« 
fition of gun-powder, has long rendered it an 
object of the fir ft importance ; upon which ac- 
count, the learned have fpared no pains to 
obtain the mod perfect knowledge of it j but 
hitherto, as it it-ems, without fuccefs, as no clear 
and fatisfactory account has yet been given of 
it. And though the methods of making it in 
France, Germany, and many other parts of the 

world, 



1 38 Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 

world, have been minutely defcribed, thefe de-. 
fcriptions, through fome defect or other, have 
been of little fervice to us, if we may judge 
from the many fruitlefs attempts to make this 
fait in England. 

The common accounts that are given us of 
nitre or faltpetre, are, indeed fo very vague and 
various, as rather to confufe and perplex, than 
give us any clear knowledge of it. Some will 
have it to be a production of nature, others en- 
tirely of art. Some tell us it is drawn from the 
air; others, that it is extracted from vegetables 
and animals. We are told too, that it is found 
upon the furface of the earth, and upon old walls 
in the form of hoar froft, and that whole pro- 
vinces are fometimes covered over with it; all 
which is certainly very falfe and fallacious; if^ 
by faltpetre, in this place, is meant that faline 
concrete, which is of fo much ufe in the com- 
pofition above-mentioned; which, though fome-r 
times found in the walks of nature, is moft 
affuredly, in general, a production of art. 

Saltpetre, to give a juft defcription of it, is 
a neutral faline concrete, evidently formed by 
a combination of a peculiar acid, with a fixt ve-r 
getable alkaline fait. This acid is found in 
certain earths, from which it is extracted, by 
elixiviating them along with wood-afhes, the fixt 
fait of which, uniting with the acid, forms this 

neutra} 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 189 

neutral one, which cryftallizes in the ley when 
boiled down to a due confidence. 

From this plain account of the formation of 
faltpetre, it muft be obvious, that it can no where 
be found, without the concurrence of thefe two 
principles ; and, confequently, not in the air, or 
in vegetables or animals, btcaufe, though this 
peculiar acid may, perhaps, be found in thefe 
fubjecls, the fixt fait muft needs be wanting. 

That it may be fometimes found in the earth, 
we mall not deny, owing to the accidental intro- 
duction of wood-afhes to a foil impregnated with 
this acid. And that from hence it may pafs into 
the ftems and apices of fome plants, with the 
moifture that enters their roots, is far from be- 
ing improbable. But that whole provinces can 
even be covered over with it, or that it can be 
generated in thefe organized bodies, as Lemeri 
and fome others have imagined, muft exceed 
all belief. 

The accounts, which travellers generally give 
us of this fait, are, that it is extracted from the 
foil of the countries they have vifited, by elixi- 
viating it with water, and evaporating the fluid ; 
which we believe may be confiftent with truths 
but here it mould not be forgotten, that a certain 
portion of wood-afhes is always added to this 
foil before it is elixiviated, a circumftance which, 
either through ignorance or inattention they have 
too often omitted to mention. We are told, 

indeed. 



190 Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 

indeed, by Mr. Bowles, that in fome parts of 
Spain, they have an earth that yields the cryf- 
tals of this fait without any affiftance of this 
kind ; and this in fuch quantities, as might fupply 
all Europe with this article. But till this fact is 
better authenticated, we have many reafons to 
doubt the truth of it. 

Be this as it may, we (hall here judge it of more 
life, to advert to thofe earths, that are well known, 
with the afiiftance of wood aihes, to yield us the 
cryftals of this fait, to point out their peculiar 
quality, and the fource from which it is derived j 
together with the true reafon why they are not 
always in a condition to yield us thefe cryftals, 
even with the addition of a fixt fait; a circum- 
ftance that has much perplexed the moft expe- 
rienced fakpetre makers. After which, nothing 
we truft will remain, but to lay down the prac- 
tical methods of making it, fupported by the 
beft authorities, as well as our own experience. 

Of thefe earths, the moft diftinguifhed are, the 
rubbifh of old houfes, the ruins of old vaults 
and cellars, &c. which rarely fail to yield us- 
the cryftals of this fait, when elixiviated with 
wood afhes. That thefe earths poffefs an acid 
quality, is not to be difputedj feeing, that 
upon reducing them to a coarfe powder, and 
percolating a fixt alkaline folution through them, 
this folution will be neutralized, and no longer 
yield us an alkaline, but a neutral fait. 

From 



Mr. MaJfeJ on Saltpetre. 191 

From what fource this acid is derived, is at 
prefent unknown. The moft general opinion 
is, that it is drawn from the air; hut to this 
there are many objections. In the firft place, 
the aerial or univerfal acid, is generally allowed 
to be not of the nitrous, but vitriolic kind. And 
fecondly, there are many earths impregnated 
with this acid, which, in all appearance, have 
had no communication with the air, of which 
the foil at the bottoms of graves is a flagrant 
inftance. 

From the well known fa£r, that the rubbifh 
of all fuch houfes, as have been occupied by 
the fikhieft inhabitants, and of fuch clay walls, 
as have flood in the neighbourhood of dunghills, 
or wherever putrid vapours more plentifully 
abound, is always mod ftrongly impregnated 
with this acid, it is moll natural to believe, 
that thefe vapours muft confer it upon them, 
and confequently, that it muft have its origin 
in putrid fubftances; but to this, there are like- 
wife many objections. In the firft place, the 
recent juices of vegetables and animals, fome 
few of the former excepted, if we are not mif- 
taken, contain no kind of acid whatever •, and 
in a putrid ftate, every body knows they are 
of a volatile alkaline nature, which being the 
mod powerful objection, we fhall here princi- 
pally endeavour to remove ; and upon the whole, 
fhall undertake to ihew, that there is an original 

acid 



192 Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 

acid in all vegetables and animals, which being 
rendered volatile by putrefaction, afiumes the 
fpecific character of the nitrous. And that, fince 
this acid conftantly arifes in vapour from putrid 
fubftances, hence it is, that the rubbifh of old 
houfes, and of old clay walls, become impregnated 
with it, as well as thofe earths that lie in con- 
junction with them. 

That the recent juices of vegetables and 
animals, are, in general, perfectly neutral, we (hall 
readily admit ; but from hence, we think it does 
not follow, that they contain neither an acid nor 
alkali y as is commonly concluded ; on the con- 
trary, we apprehend, a more juft inference is, 
that being mixt, they muft neceffarily contain 
loth. It is certain, that if we throw a calcareous 
earth, or fixt fait into any of thefe juices, the 
earth or fait will be neutralized by it; which 
we take to be a proof, that it contains an acid, 
which quits the weaker to join with the ftronger 
alkali, according to the law of affinities. 

And the cafe will be the fame, if thefe juices 
are putrefied. If we throw a fixt fait into any 
putrid liquor, it will be neutralized by it, and 
now, if we dip a piece of foft paper into this mix- 
ture and dry it, it will burn like a match, in the 
fame manner as if dipped into a weak folu- 
tion of faltpetre ; which mows, that it not only 
contains an acid, but one of the nitrous fort ; 
and provided this liquor were perfectly putre- 
fied, 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre'. 193 

ficd, and the marine fait, with which all ni- 
trous leys greatly abound, carefully removed, 
we cannot help thinking that upon being boiled 
down to a due confidence it would yield the 
cryftals of faltpetre. The author muft acknow- 
ledge he has boiled down many of thefe mix- 
.tures without fuccefs; but it was at a time when 
he was ignorant of the neceffity of attending 
to the above circumftances. 

That all putrid fubftances, and confequently, 
v their juices, are of a volatile alkaline nature, 
is not to be denied, owing to an union of their 
acid and oily parts with their earth, which 
is equally fubtilized by the putrid proceis. 
But that the two former are fafely feparated from 
the latter, by adding a calcareous earth or fixt 
fait to them, the meaneft chemift can tell us, 
the earthy or alkaline part flying off, and leaving 
the acid and oily ones combined with the earth 
or fait, with which they have a greater affinity. 
And that thus calcareous earths, by lyino- in 
conjunction with putrid matters, become poi- 
fefled of a volatile acid, oily mix/, which is Stahl's 
precife defcription of the nitrous acid, muft be 
clear to conviction. 

But the ftrongeft proof of the exiftence of an 
acid in putrid juices, if the earths of (tables and 
cow-ftalls do not afford an equal one, muft 
be drawn from the foil at the bottoms of graves, 
which can certainly derive its nitrous acid quality 

Vol. I. O from 



ig\ Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 

from nothing, but the corrupt bodies with which 
it lies in contact; and this may fatisfy us, in 
refpect to the fource, from which other ab- 
fbrbent earths may derive it. 

Other earths, in common ufe among the falt- 
petre- makers, are thofe of ftables and cow-Malls, 
that have drank up much animal urine j the 
bottoms of (linking pits and ditches, and the 
like. Thefe they take out, and lay in heaps, 
till, by repeated trials, they find them fit for 
their purpofe. It is commonly fuppofed, that, 
during this period, they draw their nitrous quality 
from the air ; but for this, there is certainly no 
juft foundation, feeing they are brought to ma- 
turity as foon, in the clofeft vault or cellar, as in 
the moft open expofure. The truth is, that all 
putrid juices contain many oily and mucila- 
ginous parts, which, till they are duly attenu- 
ated by putrefaction, will not rufFer any cryftals 
to form in the leys that are drawn from thefe 
earths; and they are laid in thefe heaps, for 
this event to take place. Another end is 
anfwered by this manoeuvre. By being thus laid 
apart, thefe earths are prevented from receiving 
any frelh fupplies of unputrid matter, which 
might contaminate the juices, that were already 
far advanced in putrefaction. 

The ingenious author of the Chemical Dic- 
tionary has told us, That the nitrous acid is no 

where 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 195 

where found, but in fuch earths, as are impreg- 
nated with the juices of vegetables and animals, 
and where thefe juices have Juftained the whole 
putrefactive procefs. But having affigned no reafon 
for it, he feems to have been little regarded. 
The obfervation is, however, certainly a very 
juft one, and had it been duly attended to, 
we imagine, might have prevented moft of thofe 
difappointments, which our countrymen have 
met with, in their attempts to make faltpetre; 
as we have reafon to think, they have been 
chiefly owing to their premature ufe of thefe 
earths. 

The common foil, in fome parts of India, is 
naturally nitrous, owing plainly to the fifh and 
flime that is left upon it by the inundations of 
the river Ganges, which foon corrupt in that hoc 
climate, and fill the earth with putrid juices ; 
and here putrefaction, being carried on with the 
created rapidity, is, of courfe, foon completed, 
and the natives are, in a fhort time, furnifhed 
with a nitrous earth perfectly matured. But it 
mult not be forgotten, that their ftrongeft earths 
are found at the bottoms of their tanks or fhallow 
ponds of water, which, in this country, are often 
of great extent, where, the water being evaporated 
by the heat of the fun, large quantities of fifh 
are left to corrupt, which furniih a mud of the 
ftrongeft nitrous quality. 

O 2 In 



ig6 Mr. Mdjfey on Saltpetre. 

In this manner, are nitrous earths naturally 
formed in thefe parts of the world, and might, 
doubtlefs, be formed in others, though not per- 
haps fo expeditioufly, by throwing into fhallow 
ponds of water, natural or artificial, all forts of 
dung and carrion, with other putrid and putre- 
fiable matters; where the water, being evaporated 
by the heat of our fummers, muft certainly leave 
a mud of the fame kind and quality. 

Putrid juices and putrid vapours are difperfed 
through the earth and air, fo that there are few 
earths, of an abforbent kind, that are not, in 
fome degree, nitrous. But it is in thofe only 
that have been drenched in an extraordinary 
degree with thefe juices, or have been long ex- 
pofed to thefe vapours, that this acid is found of 
any confiderable ftrength. And, even here, we find 
it but very fparingly diffeminated in them, if we 
may judge from the large quantities of earth 
that muft be elixiviated, to obtain a fmall portion 
of faltpetre. Cramer has told us, that two ounces 
of faltpetre may fometimes be extracted from 
one pound of earth, which we have reafon to 
think is an arrant fable j fmce, in the city of Paris, 
where, we may prefume, thofe earths are fele&ed 
with the bed judgment, we lhall find that one 
bufhel of earth, with half that quantity of wood- 
alhes, will fcarce produce one pound of this fait ; 
and we are informed, that it requires eight car: 

loads, 



Mr. MaJJey on Saltpetre. 197 

loads, which are perhaps fmall ones, to make one 
hundred weight. There can be no doubt, that the 
trifling value of the materials, and the fmall 
labour that is required, alone enable thefaltpetre 
makers to carry on this bufinefs, and that, under 
the fame circumftances it may be carried on in 
other places. 

From the nature and constitution of thefe 
earths, it muft be evident, that they may be 
eafily formed by methods of art, nothing more 
being neceffary than to lay calcareous earths, in 
conjunction with putrid matters, or to drench, 
them with their juices, and to wait, till we find 
them fit for our purpofe. All this is well known; 
but not fo, we apprehend, the procefs by which 
they are brought to maturity, which is the rea. 
fon that our patience is often put to too fevere 
a trial, in waiting for this event. It is a folly to 
deny, that it is yet a fecret, that thefe earths derive 
their peculiar quality from the putrid matters 
with which they are connected, and that they 
are brought to maturity, entirely by putrefaction. 

Glauber, who, from the obfervations he had 
made upon the fruits and effe&s of the bottoms 
of (linking ditches, feems to be the firft that 
attempted to form artificial nitre beds, threw 
into pits, covered from the rain and fun, but 
cxpofed as much as poffible to the air, all forts 
pf dung, with the cuttings of trees, refufe of 

O 3 gardens, 



198 Mr. MaJJey on Saltpetre. 

gardens, and other putrid and putrefiable matters, 
to which he added wood-afhes j and by this 
means, in a courfe of time, obtained, not a mere 
nitrous, but a true Jaltpetre earth, that afforded 
him the cryftals of this fait, upon fimple elix- 
iviation and evaporation. 

It does not appear, that this celebrated Chemift 
had the lead idea, that thefe putrid matters were 
of any other ufe, than to draw the nitre, as he 
called it, from the air, in which the fixt fait of the 
wood-afhes might poffibly afiift. In this ftate 
of ignorance, his followers, for the moft part, 
feem ftill to remain -, having adopted, as far as 
we know, no other doctrine; and having varied 
from this practice, only in difpofing thefe mate- 
rials above ground, inftead of below, in order to 
expofe them the more to this element. 

It muft not be paffed over, that Glauber fome- 
times filled large wooden veffels with all kinds 
of dung, and, when they had completed their 
putrefaction, he percolated a ftrong alkaline fo- 
lution, through them, drawn from lime and 
wood-afhes, which afforded him a ley of the fame 
kind and quality, with that drawn from the earth 
of his other nitre beds. 

A late writer has told us, that there are but 

three ways of obtaining nitrous earths. In walls, 

that is, by raifing clay walls, and expofing them 

to the air — In fits; by throwing all forts of 

' putrid 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 199 

putrid and putrefiable fubftances into them—- 
And in hovels ; by laying thefe materials in heaps 
under them. The flrft he difapproves, becaufe, 
as he tells us, though thefe walls are generally 
.covered with draw, the nitre, or rather the nitrous 
earth that is formed upon them, is frequently 
waflied away by the rain. But there is certainly 
.another objection, and that is, the tedious time 
which thefe walls muft commonly ftand, except 
they are railed in the neighbourhood of dunghills, 
before they receive any confiderable impregna- 
tion. In Pruflia, where we are told thefe walls 
are raifed, by order of the king, throughout the 
.country, for the ufe of the faltpetre makers, we 
are at the fame time informed, they are often 
found but weakly impregnated, at the end of 
twenty years, though dung or litter is fometimes 
mixt up with the clay, of which they are 
compofed. 

He does not approve of difpofing the mate- 
rials in pits, becaufe, as he obferves, the air 
cannot be conveniently admitted to their inte- 
rior parts. }HIe, therefore, gives the preference 
to the difpcfal of them under hoye)s, where, by 
various contrivances that he lays down, the 
air may be freely admitted to them. And here 
we Ihould certainly join him, could we be 
brought to believe th^t a current of air, for 
which he contends, was any great promoter of 
putrefaction. But we have been told, and have 

O 4 good 



200 Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 

good caufe to believe, that a clofe, warm, moift 
•air is the greateft promoter of this procefs ; 
and, therefore, muft have leave to think, that 
a vault, or a cellar, muft be the mod proper 
repofitory for thefe materials, where their putre- 
faction, being carried on with the greateft vigour a 
muft, of courfe, be the fooner completed. 

Or, in defect of thefe conveniences, that the 
fame end might be anfwered by laying them, 
about a yard thick, upon a piece of ground, funk 
a few inches below the level, and bedded with clay, 
where, through the rain that falls, in the fpace 
of a year or two, they muft be completely putre- 
fied; particularly, if they were now and then 
turned over, and no frefh additions were made 
to thtm ; for, whilft we continue to heap frefli 
materials upon old dunghills, it is impoffible 
that the whole mafs fhould be equally putrefied; 
It is obfervable, that the writer laft mentioned 
fays not a word of the ufe of putrefaction, nor 
of the expediency of promoting this procefs, by 
all the mean's that lie in our power, in order to 
accelerate the maturity of thefe earths; which we 
commonly attribute to his ignorance of this 
circumftance. 

Nor does the practice of the faltpetre makers 
indicate any fuperior knowledge. Many of their 
nitre beds are raifed ten or twelve feet high, 
whofe putrefaction muft advance very flowly, 
through the preffure of the upper parts upon the 

hwer* 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 201 

lower, and the want of moifture, which cannot 
eatily be introduced to fuch lofty heaps. 

About thirty years ago, an ingenious Chemift, 
of our own nation, having vifued many of the 
oreat works abroad, and made the obfervation, 
that to form a nitrous earth, nothing more ap- 
peared to be necefiary, than to mix up calcareous 
earths with any kind of dung, and expofe thefe 
materials to the air, returned home, fully per- 
fuaded that he was mailer of the fecret, and had 
intereft enough to prevail upon many of his 
friends to join him, in erecting a large faltpetre 
work, at Fulham, near London. Here, many- 
hundred loads of lime were got together, and 
laid with ftrata of horfe muck, in long high 
ridges, the more to be expofed to this element; 
the confequence of which was, that the rain run- 
ning off, without penetrating the mafs, no putre- 
faction enfued, and the lime, at the end of four 
or five years, was found to have received little or 
no impregnation ; upon which the work was 
dropped, with great lofs to the Proprietors. 

Two errors were here committed. In the fir ft 
place, the dung, which ought to have been, at 
lead, in treble the proportion to the lime, made 
but about one fourth part of the heaps. And 
fecondly, they were fo difpofed, that, for want 
of moifture, they could never enter into a putrid 
(late: whereas, had the dung been in a due pro- 
portion, and tirj whole been fp'read about a yard 

thick. 



Z 02 Mr. Majfey on Saltpetip. 

thick, there can be no difpute, that, in the fpace 
of a year or two, they had been perfe&ly putre- 
fied, and a nitrous earth had been formed that 
rnight have prevented this cataftrophe ; efpeci- 
ally if the heap had been treated, as we have 
pefore hinted. 

When the author faw thefe materials, fomc 
time after the work was dropped, the dung ap- 
peared to have been quite burnt up by the lime, 
3nd to have had no effect upon it j but his judg- 
ment was not then ripe enough, to point out the 
caufe of this difafter. 

This work, as we have been informed, was 
afterwards taken up by a foreigner, who formed 
his nitre beds in a very different manner; but 
they were raifed fo high, and confequently fq 
long in arriving at maturity, as quite tired 
out the patience of thole who were concerne4 
with him. 

There may have been other reafons for laying 
afide this work ; and among the reft, its not 
anfwering the expectations of the Proprietors in 
refpect to profit $ which, in new undertakings, 
are apt %o run pretty high, without confidering, 
that the profits of every bufinefs depend upon, 
tht {kill and knowledge with which it is con- 
ducted. We have before remarked, that Glauber 
generally added wood-afhes to the materials^ 
of which he compofed his nitre beds j by which 
means, in a courfe of time, he obtained not a, 

mere 



Mr. Mafiey on Saltpetre. 203 

mere nitrous, but a true faltpetre earth, which 
required nothing but eiixiviation with water, 
and a fubfequent evaporation, to afford him 
the cryftals of this fait ; which practice is ftill 
followed by many of his fucceffors j though, 
as it feems, without any clear conviction of 
their ufe j it being a point in difpute, whether 
they are of any ufe or not. 

The author of the article Nitre, in the French 
Encyclopedia, boldly affirms, that the juices or 
decodions of all fuch plants, as yield much 
fixt fait by incineration, being putrefied and 
clarified with lime, according to Mr. Boldue's 
method, laid down in the Memoirs of the Academy 
of Sciences for the year 1734, will yield us the cry- 
ftals of a true faltpetre, without the afllftance of any 
fixt alkaline fait whatever; and that at Montpeli- 
er, and all oyer Languedoc, they make faltpetre 
without ufing the leaft particle of fuch fait. Upon 
which we can only obferve, that if this be a facl, 
it muit be very furprizing, that it is not known in 
Paris, and that the Gentlemen of the Academy, 
who, fome time ago, drew up and publifhed 
by order of their monarch, an account of the 
feveral methods of making faltpetre in all 
parts of the world, fo far as they could arrive 
at the knowledge of them, (hould not take the 
lean: notice of it j though they have thought 
proper to record one of a fimilar nature, Mr. 
Brown's method of making faltpetre in Virginia. 

This 



2C>4 ^ r ' Majfey on Saltpetre. 

This Gentleman tells us, that if we fprinkle 
the clay floor of a tobacco houfe with ambeer, 
which we take to be a putrid infufion of tobacco, 
and cover it with the rotten leaves, in a fort- 
night's time, upon removing the leaves, we (hall 
find the floor covered with faltpetre, in the form 
of hoar froft, drawn from the air, which being 
fwept up, and elixiviated with warm water, will 
afford us a ley, that, being boiled down to the 
confidence of cream, will (hoot into cryftals of 
-this fait. Now we can eafily believe, that thefe 
fweepings, with the afliftance of wood^-afhes, 
•would afford us fuch a ley, but not without ; and' 
"therefore muft conclude, that there is here fome 
omiffion. 

We muft farther obferve, that this Gentleman 
takes no notice of any marine fait that is formed 
in this ley, which, being found in all nitrous 
leys, muft render this account very fufpicious. 
And what may give us a more unfavourable 
opinion of this method, is, that, fince the author 
obtained a reward of three hundred pounds from 
the Britifh Parliament for this notable difcovery, 
we have heard no more of it. 

Whilft the feveral parts or principles of which 
this faline concrete is compofed remained un? 
known, we might give credit to a number of 
tales refpedling its origin and formation ; which, 
at this time, without betraying the greateft weak-, 

nefs a 



Mr. Maffey en Sartptre^ iq$. 

flefs, we cannot give the leaft ear to — of its being 
drawn from the air — of its being generated in 
vegetables and animals — of its being found upon 
the furface of old walls — and, to conclude the 
whole, of its being formed without the affiitance 
of a fixt fait ; all which muft be found equally 
repugnant to reafon and experience, which we 
may bring the ordinary practice of making falt- 
petre to confirm. 

And here, we cannot help expreffing our fur- 
prize, that fo much time has been fpent by many 
ingenious perfons in the difcovery of new methods 
of making faltpetre, when it muft be obvious, 
that, in cafe they fucceeded, there is none 
that could be more plain, fimple, and lefs ex- 
penfive, than the old and approved one, of which 
we fhall now proceed to give a more particular 
account. 

•In large and populous towns, the faltpetre 
makers chiefly make ufe of the rubbifli. of old 
houfes, the ruins of old vaults and cellars, &c» 
Thefe they collect, and, having reduced them to 
a coarfe powder, elixiviate with about one third 
the quantity of wood-alhes ; in which ley, when 
boiled down to a due confiftence, the cryftals of 
faltpetre are found to (hoot. During the boiling, 
large quantities of marine fait are formed in 
this lixivium, which, cryftallizing whilft the 1U 
quor is hot, are taken out with perforated ladles. 

The 



lo S Mr. Majfey en Saltpetres 

The ley is then taken our, and fet in a cool place 
for the faltpetre to cryftallize. 

In defect of thefe earths, they colled thofe of 
ftables and cow-flails, that have drank up much 
animal urine, the bottoms of ftinking pits and 
ditches, efpecially of thofe, that have received 
the contents of daughter and privy houfes. 
Thefe they take out, and lay in heaps, commonly 
mixt up with alitde lime, till, by repeated trials, 
they find them fit for their purpofe ; which is 
known, in fome meafure, by their having totally 
loft their offenfive odour, a fure fign that their 
putrefaction is completed. 

Where thefe earths cannot be procured in 
fufficient quantities, they form, what are called, 
artificial nitre beds, by laying all forts of putrid 
and putrefiable fubftances in conjunction with 
calcareous earths, keeping them in a moiftflate, 
and waiting, as the phrafe is, till they are 
brought to maturity. If the wood-afhes are not 
added, when thefe materials are committed to 
putrefaction, they are added when they are elixi- 
riated, but never, that we have heard, omitted. 

The common peafants in France and Germany, 
who are almoft all faltpetre makers, fcrape toge- 
ther the muck and offals of their farm yards, 
and, throwing them under open fheds, fuffer them 
to lie, till they find they will anfwer their end. 
Though they know little of the ufe of putre- 
faction, they take care to promote this procefs, 

by 



Mr. Maffey on Snltpetri. So^ 

by drenching them with urine or muck water, 
and frequently turning them over, by which 
means, they are brought to maturity much fooner „¦ 
than the larger nitre beds. Thefe materials, 
with the wood-afhes that their hearths fupply, 
if not added before, are thrown into a large tub, 
and water poured upon them, which runs out 
through a hole, fluffed with draw, at the bottom 
of the veffel. Thus fimply do they procure 
their leys, in the boiling of which, their women 
and children are chiefly employed. 

Where any article of commerce is compofed 
of materials of little or no value, and which re- 
quire fmall (kill or ingenuity to manufacture, 
great numbers of poor perfons will naturally 
take up this employment, whofe diftreffes will 
oblige them to difpofe of it, upon the moil 
moderate terms; to which they will be farther 
urged by the policy of the government under 
which they live, which will reftrain them from 
exporting it, till its own wants is fupplied. To 
this we may fairly attribute the fmall price 
that faltpetre bears in France and Germany. But 
this can be no difcouragement to the Englifh, 
among whom it bears a much greater price, noc- 
withftanding the importations of their India 
Company-, and confequently, muft afford the 
makers a much greater profit, mould the govern- 
ment refufe, by a fmall bounty of one penny 

per 



ao8 Mr, Majfey on Sdlipetre. 

per pound, upon all the fakpetre made in Eng- 
land, to give them fuitable encouragement. 

The French are not infenfible of the great 
advantages they derive, from making their own 
fakpetre ; and, therefore, pay no fmall attention 
to it. 

The fakpetre makers in Paris are incorporated, 
and have, befides, the privilege of carrying off 
the rubbifh of all the old houfes they fhall think 
proper, without fee or reward ; though this in- 
deed is but a poor compenfation for the extra- 
ordinary expence they are put to in firing, in a 
city where fuel is fo dear. 

In the year 1775, fome defeft being found in 
the fakpetre brought to market, owing more* 
perhaps, to their parfimonious methods of making 
it, than to any thing elfe, the King of France 
immediately ordered a committee, of the Gentle- 
men of the Academy, to draw up and publifh an 
account of the feveral methods of making fak- 
petre, in all parts of the world, that all his fub- 
jefts might be made equally acquainted with 
them ; and, at the fame time, offered a eonfi- 
derable reward, to whoever mould difcover the 
fecret of nature in the formation of this fait, that 
they might equally avail themfelves of it. 

It has been fhewn, that nitrous earths are not 
uncommon in the walks of nature, and that, by 
the addition of wood-afhes to them, they are 
converted into true fakpetre earths. Now it is 

only 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 209 

only allowing that thele afhes may fometimes be 
accidentally introduced to an earth of this kind, 
to fhew us how a true faltpetre earth may natu- 
rally be formed ; and if the ftreets of the city of 
Paris, or their dunghills upon which they throw 
their wood-a(hes, fometimes exhibit a true falt- 
petre earth, it can be no great rarity. 

It can fcarcely be conceived that the Englifh 
have been ignorant of the method of making: 
faltpetre in France and Germany, where this 
bufinefs has been long carried on, in the molt 
public and open manner. But that fome points 
of no fmall importance may have efcaped their 
obfervation, may eafily be credited, from the ill 
fuccefs with which their attempts have always 
been attended ; and none more likely than their 
cuftom of waiting till the materials, they lay 
together, for this purpofe, are found fit to anfwer 
their end. 

The author of this Effay once formed a 
nitre bed with great care and exaclnefsj and, at 
the end of a year, expecled to have reaped the 
fruits of his labour ; but herein was totally difap- 
pointed. The leys, that he drew from thele earths, 
afforded him no cryftals of this fait ; upon which 
they were thrown afide as ufelefs ; till, a year or 
two after, he took it into his head to make a 
fecond trial of them, and now found they an- 
fwered his purpofe extremely well ; which he 
could only attribute to their being more per- 

Vot I. P frdly 



2io Mr. Maffey on Saltpetre. 

fectly putrefied, as they had been fecluded from 
the air the whole time. This gave him the firft 
idea of the ufe and neceffity of putrefaction, 
which made too ftrong an impreffion upon his 
mind to be eafily erafed. 

With earths, thus duly matured, we can 
fcarcely fail of fucceeding in this bufinefs as well 
as our neighbours. Yet there may be reafons for 
our declining it. 

The large quantities of earth that muft be 
elixiviated to obtain a fmall portion of faltpetre, 
it muft be owned, affords no very tempting prof- 
peel:. And the fears of not finding a fufficient 
quantity of wood-afhes in this country may have 
ftill greater weight. 

The labour of collecting thefe earths, it is cer- 
tain, cannot be fmall ; yet may the value of this 
commodity fully pay the price of it, when brought 
to a good market, which it is likely to find in 
England. 

In refpecV. to wood-afhes, they may reafonably 
be judged to be lefs plentiful in this than in other 
countries where wood is the only fuel. But where 
pot-afh is made, in confiderable quantities, as in 
many of our counties, there certainly can be no 
fcarcity of them ; and, if their place may be fup- 
plied by another commodity equally cheap, and 
eafily procured, we can never find any real want 
of them. This is foreign pot-afh, which we find 
recommended in a fmall work, not long ago 

publifhed, 



Mr. MaJJey on Saltpetre': 21 1 

publifhed, by order of the King of France^ by 
fome of the moft eminent chemifts, as far pre- 
ferable to wood-afhes. Upon many accounts 
it has been before obferved, that Glauber, fome- 
times, threw all forts of dung into a large wooden 
velTel, and, when they had completed their pu- 
trefaction, percolated a fixt alkaline folution 
through them ; which furnifhed him with a ley 
of the fame kind and nature with that drawn 
from nitrous earths and wood-ames. This, we 
may prefume, gave occafion for thefe ingenious 
Gentlemen to make fome experiments this way, 
the refuk of which they have given to the pub- 
lic. We tried this method many years ago, 
with fome fuccefs ; but found it depended upon 
the maturity of the materials ; which, indeed, 
may be collected from Glauber. What the 
French writers have faid upon ; this fubjecl, we 
fhall give in a poftfcript ; in order to remove 
every objection againft our attempting to make 
faltpetre in England, upon account of the fear- 
city of wood allies. 

This difficulty being got over, we trufl nothing 
will remain, but to give fuch an account of the 
practical method of making faltpetre as may be 
relied on, and be fufficiently explicit, to prevent 
our falling into any errors. 

The faltpetre makers in Paris chiefly make 
ufe of the rubbifh of old houfes, the ruins of old 
vaults, and cellars, &c. This they reduce to a 

P 2 coarfe 



212 Mr. Maffey on Saltpetre. 

coarfe powder, and having fcreened it, proceed 
as follows. 

i They provide a number of fmall open tubs, 
which they prefer to large ones, upon account 
of their being more eafily moved, and emptied 
of the materials. Thefe they place upon (tillages, 
about two ftet high, and in fuch a manner that 
One veffel may receive the ley, that runs from 
two of them. In each tub, near the bottom, is 
fixt a fpiggot and faufet, and, to prevent the 
wood-afhes from choaking up the latter, a 
parcel of the round earth is thrown in firft, 
and the alhes upon it. They then add the re- 
mainder of the earth in the proportion of two 
bufhels of the latter to one of the former. They 
throw the earth in lightly, that the water may 
more readily pafs throught it, and they hollow 
it at the top, that it may more conveniently 
receive it. 

They have different numbers of thefe tubs, 
but generally twenty four, which they place in 
three rows, eight in each ; and into each tub 
they throw three bufhels of wood- allies, and 
fix of earth. Ten demiqueus* of water being 
pafled through the firft row of eight tubs, is 
poured upon the fecond, and afterwards upon 
the third ; and now the firft row of eight tubs 
being emptied of the earth and afhes, is re- 

* A demiqueu, as far as we can learn, contains about ninety- 
gallons. 

plenifned 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 213 

plenifhed with frefh materials, and the ley, 
which has paffed through the three rows of 
eight tubs, is paffed through this likewife. 

Having thus paffed through four rows of eight 
tubs, and been reduced to two demiqueus by 
the abforption of the materials, it is carried to 
fhe boiler under the name of le Cuite. 

Such is the procefs when a new work is 
erected j in an old one, only fix demiqueus of 
water are paffed through the three rows of eight 
tubs, which are filled with frefh materials every 
day, 

The lixivium is carefully fcummed, during 
the boiling, and, when it is fo far advanced, that 
a pellicle begins to appear upon the furface, a 
workman is conftantly employed, with a perforated 
ladle, to take out the marine fait, which now 
begins to form and fall to the bottom of the 
boiler. This being thrown into a whifket, drains 
into the boiler again. When the lixivium is fo 
far evaporated, that a drop of it will congeal 
upon a piece of cold iron, it is taken out, 
and thrown into a tub, for the remainder of 
the marine fait, and other dregs, to fettle j 
and, after (landing about half an hour, it is 
drawn off, whilfb yet warm, into (hallow copper 
pans, and fet in a cool place for the faltpetre 
to cryftallize. 

The produce of this operation is generally 

jut one hundred and thirty pounds of a brown 

V 3 fort, 



4 14 Mr. MaJJey on Saltpetre. 

fort of faltpetre, which is fold to government for 
three-pence halfpenny per pound, and carried to 
the arfenal to be refined. 

The liquor remaining in the bafons, when' the 
faltpetre is cryftallized, is called Eau Mere, or 
mother water, and is poured upon the earths 
in fmall quantities, when difpofed in the tubs 
for elixiviation ; though fome makers think it 
bed to dilute it with water, and percolate it 
through a frefh bed of wood-afhes. The earths, 
when difcharged from the tubs, are thrown 
afide to dry under an hovel, and when dry, 
are fpread, about a foot thick, to receive the 
fcummings, eau mere, putrid urine, or any 
other putrid liquor, they can get to throw upon 
them, and in a few months, we are told, are 
fit for ufe, a fecond time, particularly, if now 
and then turned over. 

To improve the colour of this faltpetre, and 
to cleanfe it ft ill more from the marine fait, 
two thoufand weight is thrown into a large 
boiler, with one demiqueu of water, in which 
it difiblves, and, in the courfe of the boiling, 
another demiqueu is added by pailfuls, which, 
every. time it is thrown in, raifes a thick fcum 
that is carefully removed. And now, the evapora- 
tion being pretty far advanced, and the marine fait 
taken out as before, a large pitcher of whites of 
eggs, or of a folution of ifinglafs or Englifh glue, 
is poured in, and well ftirred-up in it, which raifes 

a thick 



Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 215 

a thick black fcurn, and is taken off with it. 
But, before the whites of eggs, &c. are thrown 
in, the boiling liquor is cooled, by adding a 
pailful of cold water. The lixivium being thus 
clarified, is treated as before. 

The eau mere of this operation, being boiled 
again, yields a faltpctre of the fame colour with 
the firft } and fome faltpetre goes through a third 
operation of the fame kind to give it a greater 
degree of purity. 

The bafons in which the ley is fet for the falt- 
petre to cryftallize, are clofely fitted with wooden 
covers, to prevent the too free entrance of the 
air, which, by cooling the liquor too foon, would 
not admit the crystals to form of fo large a fize. 

The cryftallization is generally completed 
in two or three days ; and about one fourth part 
is fuppofed to be loft in refining. 

Such is the method of making faltpetre in 
Paris, as tranfmitted to us by thofe whofe know- 
ledge and veracity cannot be called in queftion ; 
in which we can find no myftery or difficulty, 
or any expence that can reafonably deter us 
from engaging in undertakings of this kind. 
The £nglifh, will, in all probability, be obliged 
to employ other earths than the rubbifh. of old 
houfes, which is the cafe with all our neighbours, 
that do not live in large and populous towns ; 
of which earths, we flatter ourfelves, we have 
given a full deicription. And here we cannot help 

P 4 obferving 



216 Mr. Majfey on Saltpetre. 

obferving one encouragement which an adven- 
turer in this way will always have, viz. that 
whatever materials he may lay together, for this 
purpofe, if they do not anfwer his end, as a fait- 
petre maker, will always find their value with 
the farmer. 

Wood-afhes are certainly an article of great 
importance, but mould they ever be found 
wanting their deficiency may be fupplied, as we 
have hinted above. Thofe who may engage 
in thefe undertakings, with the lead rifque or 
expence, are certainly the pot-afh makers in 
this kingdom, who, being provided with the 
neceflary utenfils, can only want a proper earth 
to begin their operations, which, in cafe they 
are unprovided, we have mown, may be eafily 
procured in the fpace of a year or two, by mix- 
ing up their dunghills with fallen lime, and fuf- 
fering them to lie till they are perfectly pu- 
trefied. 

The author, fome years ago, caufed a trench 
to be dug in an open field, ten yards long, one 
yard wide, and one foot deep. This he half filled 
with good muck from a dunghill, and covering 
it up with the foil, mixt with one third the 
quantity of fallen lime, left it to take its fate. 
The weeds were plucked off, as they fprouted up, 
and it was twice turned over in the fpace of a year ; 
at the end of which, this earth, being elixivi- 
ated with wood-afhes, afforded him fair cryftalg 

of 



Mr. Maffey on Saltpetre. iiy 

of faltpetre. In fo eafy a manner may a nitrous 
tarth be prepared. 

We fhall add no more than that the crofter's 
ley, after it has performed its office of carrying 
off the foul oily parts of linen, or linen yarn, 
and which is generally fuffered to run wafte, 
may here be certainly ufed to good advantage: 
&nd that we would advife every one who is in- 
clined to try experiments, in this way, not to make 
them with lefs than one bufhel of earth, and 
half this quantity of wood-aflies, from which two 
gallons of ley may be drawn, which, bein» 
boiled down to about a pint, may indicate the 
fucccfs, if any is to be expecled. 

J?. S. Of the Ufe of Pot-ajh in making of Salt-petre, 
tranflated from the French. 

Thofe who have attended to the former part 
of this work, will, doubtlefs, be fenfible of the 
ufe of wood- allies in the formation of faltpetre. 
That it is impoffible to make this fait without 
them, or fomething of a fimilar nature. Remem- 
bering that faltpetre, properly fpeaking, is a 
compofition of two fubftances, united and com- 
bined in the fame proportion, which are the 
nitrous acid, and a fixt alkali. 

That the faltpetre formed in fome earths, for 
the moft part contains only one of thefe two 
principles ; the nitrous acid, which being com- 
bined with a calcareous earth, forms a nitre 

with r 



«i8 Mr. MaJJey on Saltpetre. 

with an earthy bafis, from which the earth mutt 
be precipitated, and a fixt fait introduced in its 
ftead, to convert it into a true faltpetre. 

Wood-afhes, upon account of the fixt alkali 
they contain, are very proper for this purpofe, 
and the faltpetre makers, by mixing thefe afhes 
with the earths they elixiviate, perform a com- 
plex operation in chemiftry; they decompofe 
one fait, and com pole another. 

But as it is the fixt alkali, in the wood-afhes, 
that alone a:ts upon the nitre with an earthy 
bafis, it follows, that if we extract this alkali 
from them, by elixiviation and evaporation, it 
will be brought into a fmaller compafs, and fup- 
ply the place of a large quantity of wood- allies. 

The fixt alkali, or fait extracted from wood- 
afhes, is known, in commerce, by the name of 
Fet-ajhy and is made in large quantities in 
Sweden, Denmark, and in all the northern parts 
of Germany ; nor is it hard to procure pot-afh 
of a good quality in France, fo that we have 
always a fimple, eafy, and cheap method of fup- 
plying the place of wood-afhes in thofc pro- 
vinces where they are fcarce or dear, and the 
bufmefs of faltpetre- making contracted upon 
this account. 

And we can afTure the reader, that where 
wood-afhes are found in the greater! plenty, 
pot-afh \v ; ll be found far preferable to them for 



the following reafons. 



In 



Mr. Mafey on Saltpetrsl 219 

In the firft place, becaufe the wood-afties ufed 
by the faltpetre • makers, in large towns, are 
generally the refufe of other trades, and contain 
little or no fixt alkali. Thofe that are ufed by 
the faltpetre makers in Paris are of this fort, and 
often afford, upon elixiviation, only a little 
Glauber's fait, Tartar of vitriol, and above all, 
large quantities of marine fait, of which the tar- 
tar of vitriol alone contains any fixt vegetable 
alkali, that can furnifti the bafis of faltpetre, • 
or be of any ufe in decompofing the nitre with 
an earthy bafis. 

Secondly, wood-afhes taking up one third of 
the room in the veficls, in which the lixivium is 
made, there is, of courfe, lefs room for the earth, 
and the faltpetre muit confequently be lefs in 
proportion. 

Thirdly, wood-afhes, being very porous, ab- 
forb a large quantity of water, which they 
obftinately retain, and this water holds a quan- 
tity of faltpetre in folution, which is 'a clear lofs 
in proportion to the quantity of water they 
contain. 

Fourthly, wood-afhes bear a very confiderable 
price in mod: parts of France, and we are certain 
this price is fuperior to that of pot-afh, con- 
fidering the portion of fixt alkali that they re- 
fpe&ively contain. 

Fifthly, thefe afhes are commonly impregnated 
with many grofs parts, and much dirt and filth, 

that 



1 io Mr. MaJJey on Saltpetre. 

that is extracted from them, which mud not only 
injure the faltpetre, but obflrucT: its crystal- 
lization. 

All thefe things being considered, with the 
practice of the Swedes, and the fuccefs of our 
own experiments, we judge ourfelves authorized 
to advife all thofe who are employed in making 
faltpetre, to place but a few wood-afhes at the 
bottom of their tubs, to ferve by way of filter, 
and to fupply their place with pot-afh in the 
following manner. 

When the tubs are filled with earth, the quan- 
tity of pot-afh we mean to employ, is to be laid 
upon it, and we are to proceed to elixiviate it 
in the ufual way. The water will immediately 
diflblve the pot-afh, which filtering through the 
earth, will decompofe the nitre with an earthy 
bafis, and convert it into faltpetre, and, if the 
pot-afh has been in a juft proportion, none of 
the former will be left behind. It is not necef- 
fary to lay the pot-afh upon the earth, in all the 
tubs, but only upon thofe in the firtt row ; becaufe 
thefe earths being wafhed fucceffively by three 
waters, the lefs pot-afh will remain in them. 

Nothing can be faid, precifely, of the quantity 
of pot-afh to be laid upon any given quantity of 
earth; this depending upon the condition of 
thefe earths, their richnefs, and the quantity of 
nitre, with an earthy bafis that they contain j and, 
jn fhorr, upon many other circumftances which it 

is 



Mr. Majfey on Sahpstri. 22? 

is impoflible to forefce. We can only, therefore, 
lay down fuch rules as may enable the faltpetre 
maker to judge, what quantity of pot-afh he ought 
to employ, according to the (late in which he 
finds thefe earths. 

For this purpofe, let him diflblve one part of 
pot-afh in two parts of water, and either filter 
the liquor, or let it (land till it is clear, and 
fet this folution afide. 

Let him then elixiviate fome very pure nitrous 
earth in three or four times its weight of water, 
and fet this lixivium likewife afide ; and if, upon 
dropping fome of the folution of pot afh into 
a glafs of his ley, he finds the latter grows 
whitifh or muddy, he may be affured that the 
precipitation of the earth is not completed, and 
confequently, that a fufneient quantity of pot- 
afii has not been employed. If, on the other 
hand, the ley remains untroubled, let him drop 
in fome of the lixivium drawn from the nitrous 
earth, upon which, if the pot-afh is in too great 
a quantity, it will likewife turn muddy. Upon 
the whole, if, in neither of thefe cafes, the liquor 
is difturbed, we may be affured the pot-afh has 
been employed in a juft proportion. 

In general it is better to ufe too little than too 
much pot-afh. When too little is employed, 
it is true, part of the nitre, with an earthy bafis, 
will not be decompofed, but it will be found 
in the mother- water after cryftallization j and 

when 



222 Mr. Ma/fey on Saltpetre: 

when a large quantity is collected it may be 
elixiviated ieparately. 

Inftead of ufing pot-afh in fubftance, it may 
be difiblved in a given quantity of water; for 
inftance, one pound of pot-afh. in two pounds of 
water, and three pounds of this liquor ufed in 
the room of one pound of pot -afli. 

The French miniftry are fo defirous of bring- 
ing pot-afh into ufe, being fenfible of the great 
advantages that mud refult from it, that they 
have ordered the Regijires des poudres, to furnifh 
the faltpetre makers, and others who may be 
inclined to take up this bufinefs with this arti- 
cle, and to take care that it is of the beft qua- 
lity. Thus far the authors, who have fet their 
names to this little piece, who are no other than 
Meffrs. Macquer, Lavoifier, D'Arey, Cadet, and 
Sage. 

It is certain, that by percolating a fixt alkaline 
folution through a nitrous earth, duly matured t 
the fame kind of ley may be obtained with that 
in common ufe among the faltpetre makers ; 
and that a folution of pot-afh, of fome kinds, 
if not of all, may anfwer this end ; but we can- 
not approve of ufing it in fubftance, as is here 
recommended. By diflblving it in water, and 
weighing it, we can know the exadt quantity of 
fixt alkali we employ, and may with great eafe 
increafe o~ diminifh it, as we fee occafion. 

The 



The Rev. Mr. Hall's Inquiry concerning, &c. 225 

The value of foreign pot-afh is no where 
better known than in England, there being, per- 
haps, no part of the world in which there is a 
greater confumpcion of it, nor which is fupplied 
with it upon cheaper terms ; which circumftance 
muft: ftrongly recommend its ufe. 



An Attempt- to JhetVy that a Taste for the Beauties 
©/Nature and the fine Arts, has no Influence 
favourable to Morals. By the Rev. Samuel 
Hall, A. M. Read May 15, 1782. 

Nullius addittus jurare in verba ma£iltri. 

Ho a. Ep. I. Lib. i. 
Scilicet uni sequus virtuti, 

. Hor. Sat. I. Lib. I. 



PHE Society^ which I have now the honour 
-*¦ to addrefs, has lately been prefented with 
feveral ingenious papers on taste. It may, 
therefore, be thought neceffary to make an apolo- 
gy, for bringing forward a fubjecl, which has 
been already fo well inveftigated. 

Were I to purfue the track of thofe who have 
gone before, it would be the higheft preemption 
to fuppofe, that any obfervations I could make, 
would be deferving attention. It would be to 

offer 



224 ^ ev ' Mr. Hall*s Inquiry concerning 

offer the Society a few fcarrty gleanings, after 
the full harveft had been gathered in. But I 
have no defign to invade the province of ano- 
ther. I fhall neither examine the principles, 
on which tafle is founded ; nor enquire, whe- 
ther it is more the child of nature, or of 
education, or the joint product of both. I 
fhali confine my remarks to the effects which 
taste, however produced, may be fuppofed 
to have on the moral character j and fhall 
endeavour to (hew, that its influence on the 
heart, is not favourable to virtue. 

A difiingui fried Member of this Society, in 
whom the Scholar and the Gentleman are moft 
happily united, has, in an elegant paper, * fup- 
ported the reverfe of this proposition ; which, 
it mu(V be owned, is no fingular opinion. It 
is maintained by very high authorities in the 
literary world ; particularly, by Lord Kaims, 
in his Elements of Critici/m-, by Gerard, in his 
EJfay on Tajle ; and indeed, by many others, 
who have profefTedly treated on this fubjecl:. 
It may, perhaps, be the prevailing and popular 
opinion of the prefent day. But are we thence 
to conclude, that it is founded in truth ? Doc- 
trines are fometimes fafhioned " to the varying 

# The Paper here alluded to has been publifhed, fiuce 
it was read to the Society, in the volume of Moral Difier- 
tations, by T. Percival, M. D. 8?c« 

hour i" 



the Influence of 'Tajle on Morals. -11$ 

hour y and many popular opinions are governed 
by no better motive, than fancy or caprice. 

To me, I own, it does not appear furprifing, 
that writers on tafte have generally been led 
to fuppofe, that its influence muft be friendly 
to virtue. When a fubject has been Jong con- 
templated, the mind becomes, in fome meafure, 
enamoured of it, views it with complacency, 
and, from an over-weening fondnefs, bellows 
attributes and perfections, which are not 
naturally its own. How often has this been 
the cafe, with fome new difcovery in philofophy ! 
Its ingenious advocate is feldom willing to con- 
fine its effects, to the rank it juftly holds. He 
would have it confidered, not only as a law of 
nature, operating in its proper fphere ; but 
as a great and universal caufe, to which all 
other caufes muft be fubordinate •, and will 
even attempt to folve all the phenomena .of 
nature by its means Thus, electricity was 
lately a favourite theory, which, for a while, 
fcemed to bid fair for univerfal empire in the 
philofophical world. And thus, fome ufeful dif- 
coveries in medicine have been rafhly exalted into 
panaceas, or univerfal remedies. The fame 
fpecics of enthufiafm has, indeed, at different 
periods, prevailed in every fcience. Hence, the 
vaft variety of new theories, and fyftems, which 
have fprung up ; and for awhile amuied the 
world, and which have, at length, yielded their 

Vol. I. Q^ ufurpation 



226 Rev. Mr. Hall's Inquiry concerning 

ufurpation to fome new conqueror, which will 
probably be equally fhort-lived. 

But to return from this digreiTion. The ad- 
vocates for the influence of Tafte on the Moral 
Character, have generally confounded that fa- 
culty with the moral sense. They feem to be 
perfuaded, that the fame power, which difcovers, 
and relifhes the beauties of nature and of art, 
muft equally difcover, and relifh the beauty, the 
order, the harmony of virtue. Lord Shaftes- 
bury * has fully adopted this notion. His difci- 
ciple Hutcheson, f with fome trifling diftinc- 
tions, has embraced the fame opinion. The 
very ingenious author of the Elements of Crilicifm 
tells us, that there is a ftrong and dole affinity 
between tafte, and the moral fenfe. " Tafte, 
fays he, in the fine arts, goes hand in hand 
with the moral fenfe, to which indeed it is nearly 
allied." % 

This natural connection, and clofe alliance, 
of tafte with the moral fenfe, may, perhaps, be 
very juftly difputed; as tafte, I apprehend, muft 
be the joint refult of delicate, corporeal, and 
intellectual powers ; whilft what is ufually un- 
derstood by a moral fenfe, muft be of a nature 
altogether intellectual. 

* Lord Shaftefbury's Chara&eriftics paffim: 

f Hatchefon's Inquiry into the Orig. of our Ideas of 
Beauty, &c. 

f Elem. Crit. Introduc. p. 7. 

But 



• the Influence of Tafte on Morals. - 22 7 

But let us, for a moment, fuppofe that fuch 
an union is really eftablifhed; and that tafte can 
take cognizance of the merit or demerit of 
actions, with the fame eafe and predion, that 
it pronounces on the abilities of the ftatuary, or 
of the painter. Will it neceffariry follow, that 
fuch a tafte muft always be productive of a vir- 
tuous conduct ? It will not be difputed,* that 
tafte generally operates in fome favourite direc- 
tion. It does not embrace all the beauties of 
nature, or of art, with equal relHh ; nor explore 
every fcience, even of thofe efteemed elegant and 
refined, with the fame keennefs of difcernment. 
The painter is not always pofTefied of an ear 
finely tuned to mufic; nor the mufician always 
delighted with the elegance and vigour of 
poetical compofition. Nature feldom produces 
an accomplished mafter, unlefs her efforts have 
been directed to one particular object. And in 
vain would be the attempt to rife to excellence, 
in any art or fcience, fave that, which is con- 
genial to the tafte. Some men, indeed, feem to 
be pollened of, what may be termed, a general 
tafte ; and are capable of, at leaft, moderate 
attainments in every branch. But tafte, like 
every other energy, perhaps is weaker, in pro- 
portion as it is diffufed. 

¦' Brown's Eflays on the CharafterifHcs, Sett. II. 8. 

0,2 Upon 



228 Rev. Mr. HaWs Inquiry concerning 

Upon this fuppofition, it is evident) a man 
may have an exquifite tafte for fome particular 
art or fcience, and yet, no tafte for virtue. To 
this fpecies of beauty the faculty may be fo little 
fenfible, as to produce no effects. In fuch a 
cafe, virtue only fhares the fate of many other 
tilings, which are confefTedly objects of tafte, 
and which are rejected, becaufe the capacity 
adapted to them is fo weak, that it may be faid 
to be wanting. 

But let us fuppofe, that tafte really exercifes 
fome of the privileges and powers of the moral 
fenfe. The advocates for its practical influence 
would not gain much, by this very ample cOncef- 
fion. The mere fenfe of the beauty of virtue 
(and it is not pretended, that any thing further 
can be the object of tafte) abftracted from 
every other confideration, will lcarcely be thought 
fufficient to fupport her caufe. The theory ap- 
pears more fpecious, than folid j more pleafing, 
than efficacious. When drefled with the art, the 
ingenuity, and the eloquence of a Shaftefbury, it 
may entertain and amufe, the heart being fup- 
pofed in a ftate of eafe, calm and indifferent. 
But its effecls will not be fufficiently ftrong with 
the generality of mankind, to fpur them on to 
action. We furvey the lovely picture, are con- 
vinced that it is a fine one, yet turn afide to 
fome other object, that agitates our hopes and 
fears 

The 



the Influence of Tafte on Morals. 229 

The doctrine may, probably, fuit the retired 
temper of the philofopher, or the apathy of the 
ftoic : but is ill calculated for "the bufy haunts 
of men," and the tumults of focial life. The 
man of tafte admires the beauty and expreflion 
exhibited in the works of a Raphael, or a Michael 
Angelo, without feeling the flighteft wilh to be- 
come an artift, and to rival thefe great matters. 
May he not, in like manner, view the charms 
of virtue, and of a moral conduit, without mak- 
ing one fingle effort to become a moralift, or a 
virtuous man ? 

I mould imagine it impoffible for any perfon, 
pofielTed of the leaft fenfibility, to read the cha*- 
racler of Sir C. Grandifon, drawn with fo much 
delicacy by Richardfon, and not admire and 
approve, the elegance of manners and purity 
of morals, with which he has adorned his hero. 
But is it certain, that he will bellow more than 
his approbation ? Will he entertain a fingle 
thought, of copying the amiable portrait ? To 
admire and reverence virtue, is a tribute extorted 
even from vice. The moft profligate, and wicked 
characters experience a fecret confcioufnefs, that 
every preference is due to virtue j and are not 
infenfible to her fuperior lovelinefs. But does 
this fenfe operate on the mind, with fufficient 
force, to influence, or to reclaim ? Video me- 
liora proboque detcviora Jcquor, muft be the 
language of every finner, whofe faculties are 
not utterly depraved. 

Q.3 cf ^ 



2 jo Rev. Mr. Hall's Inquiry concerning 

, " It is a remarkable circumftance, fays Brown 
in his EJffoy on the Charafterics,* that, in the 
decline of both the Greek and Roman ftates, 
when religion had loft its credit and efficacy, this 
very tafte, this ipecies of philofophy, ufurped its 
place, and became the common ftudy and amufe- 
ment both of the vile and vulgar." Quintilian, 
no doubt, had a view to this, in the following 
pa Mage. Nunc autem, qu<e vel ut propria philofophi.t 
offer untur, pajfim traftamus omnes. £htis enim modo 
'de jufto, asquo, ac bono, non et virpejjimus loquitur ? 
The truth feems to be, that a mere fenfe of 
the beauty of virtue cannot operate, as a coercive 
power ;f and, however the theory may pleafe 
the reafoner in the fhade, when the paffions 
ftagnate without impulfe, and the appetites are 
fecluded from their objeds, it will be of little 
force, againft the ardor of defire, or the vehe- 
mence of rage; amidft the pleafures, or conflicts 
of the world. To countera& the power of 
temptations, hope muft be excited by the prof- 
pect of rewards, and fear, by the expectation of 
punifhment. In a word, virtue may owe her 
panegyric to a Plato, or a Shaftefbury, but muft 
derive her efficacy and authority, from religion. 

From what has been advanced, it appears to 
me extremely evident, that, fuppofing tafte were 

* Efiay II. Sea. 10. 
¦\ See 'the Preface to the Preceptor, by Dr. Johnfon. 

confidered, 



the Influence of Tafte on Morals, 23 1 

confidered, not only as connected with, but even 
advanced to the rank of, the moral fenfe, its 
influence on the heart would be too faint and 
languid, to produce any moral effects. The 
charms of virtue* may be feen with the eye of 
fpeculation, without exciting in us a defire of 
becoming virtuous; juft as an excellent picture, 
or fine proipect, may afford us very considerable 
pleafure, and yet produce not a fingle wifh to 
difpoffefs the owners, and to make them ours. 
And though it may be fuppofed, that a fenfe of 
the charms of virtue muti naturally give us a 
prejudice in her favour ; yet, Will this prejudice 
be fufiicient to keep us fteady to her interefts, 
when Vice fteps forth, attired with every feduc- 
tive ornament of tafte, that can win the affec- 
tions ; and engages the ftrongeft paffions of the 
heart, as advocates in her favour ? 

But we are told, that " tafte naturally 
fweetens and harmonizes the temper, and re- 
strains the turbulence of paftion, and violence 
of purfuit."f On this fuppofition, the beauty 
of virtue may have confiderable effects 00 

* " Our fenfe of beauty from objects by which they 2re 
conftituted good to us, is very diftincl from the defire of 
them, when they are thus conftituted." 

Hutcheson's Inquiry, &c. 

-|- Elements of Criticifm. Introducl. page If. 
Fercival on a Taile for the Beauties of Nature. 

Q 4 a. mind 3 



*2j2 Rev. Mr. Hall's Inquiry concerning 

a mind, already difpofed, by calmnefs and com- 
pofure, to yield to .the gentlefl influence. 

This reafoning will not eafily be fupported 
by experience, and matter of fact. The con- 
nection between genius and tafte is fo common, 
that they may almofl be confidered, as infepara- 
ble companions. Genius without tafte, would 
be no better than frenzy : and tafte, without 
genius, would be diftinguifhed for nothing, but 
a lifelefs accuracy. But genius, it is generally 
agreed, is united to a warm and inflammable 
conftitution. " If," fays an eminent critic, " the 
imagination be lively, the paftionswill beftrongi 
true genius feldom refides in a cold and phlegma- 
tic conftitution. The fame temperament, and the 
fame fenfibility, that makes a poet or a painter, 
will be apt to make a man a lover, and a 
debauchee."* Thefe propensities of nature may 
be retrained by the dictates of realbn, and 
efpecially, by the awful fanctions of religion ; 
and thus, genius and virtue may unite, and adorn 
the fame perfon. But in vain fhall we look for 
thefe important effects, from the influence of 
tafte. In vain (hall we expect to find, that men 
of genius and of tafte will be always diftin- 
guifhed, for the fweetnefs of their tempers, and 
the purity of their morals. The irritability of 

* Wartoa's EfTay on the Writings and Genius of Pope. 

Vol. I. p. 10^. 

a Pope 



the Influence of Tafte oh Morals. 233 

a Pope, and a Gray ; and the voluptuoufnefs of 
a Montague, and a Chesterfield, may be ad- 
duced as inftances, amongfl: numberlefs others, 
of the truth of what has been advanced. 

But we are further told, " that a tafte for the 
beautiful fcenes of nature, not only compofes an4 
harmonizes the temper, but difpofes the mind 
to acts of piety and devotion, by raifing our 
ideas from Nature, to Nature's God."* The 
thought is pleafing, and ingenious ; but mud: 
not be admitted, without many exceptions. The 
impreffions made by the beauties of nature, will 
greatly depend on the paffions, the habits^ 
and the purfuits of the beholder. Let the 
mufician take the "wildly devious walk," his 
notice will probably be attracted by the melody 
of the grove, as moft nearly related to his 
favourite art. The eye of the Painter will be 
engaged, by the rich landfcape that lies before 
him ; and his thoughts will be naturally turned to 
the effect which might be produced, by a lively 
tranfcript on canvas, of fo picturefque a fcene. 
While the Poet, however ftruck by the grandeur 
or elegance of furrounding objects, will, only 
meditate, how they would "live in defcription, 
and look green in fong." It is the calm con-? 
templative mind alone, influenced by religious 
jmprefiions, that furveys this fair heritage, with 

• Percival on a Tafte for the Beauties of Nature. 

pious 



jj4 R 6V ' Mr. Hairs Inquiry concerning 

pious and grateful fentiments towards the al* 
mighty Creator. A mind thus happily dif- 
pofed, in the animated language of Shakefpeare, 

*.* Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, 
Sermons in ftones, and good in every thing." 

I fhall now mention a few inftances, where 
tafte feems to be productive of misfortune, and 
immorality. We frequently fee a man of real 
and acknowledge tafte, run into all the folly, 
and extravagance of virtue Jt is not fufficient 
for him, £ hat he may be regaled with the pro- 
ductions of art and genius, in the pofll-flion of 
another. A man of this unhappy turn, feels a 
reftkfs defire to call them his own. He is 
perpetually in queft of fome new object ; but 
Jus unfortunate paffion grows more violent by 
indulgence; and, however a new acquifition 
may gratify for the moment; yet, in the end, 
jt becomes the fource of frefli difquiet. Thus^ 
like Pope's Curio, who ? 

._„....- « Reftlefs by his fair one's fide, 
Sighs for an Qtho, and neglq&s his bride :" 

He is perpetually haunted by the demon of 
tafte; his mind becomes fretful, peevifh, and 
diftatisfied ; equally incapable of giving, or 
receiving fatisfaction. But, fhould his circum- 
ftances be contracted, the confequences are 
dreadful indeed ! He involves his deareft con- 
nections in all the miferies of poverty. 

" The 






the Influence o/Tafle on Morals. 235 

ff The bailiffs come, rude men, profanely bold, 
And bid him turn his Venus into gold. 
No Sirs i" he cries, " I'll fooner rot in jail ! 
Shall Grecian arts be truck'd for Englilh bail?. 
Such heads might make their very buftos laugh: 
His daughter flarves : but Cleopatra's fafe." * 

Another is betrayed into a conduct equally 
ridiculous and fatal, by a tafte for the elegances 
of life, and domeftic refinements. Fancy js 
ever ready to fuggeft fome new plan to be 
executed, or improvement to be made. The 
houfe is capable of ftill higher embellifhments; 
and the garden may be laid out, in a manner 
more beautiful. He complies with the fuggeftions 
of his refined tafte — involves himfelf in diffi- 
culties — and is at length ruined. 

The malady of a third is, an exceffive and fickly 
kind of delicacy. His feelings are fo nice, and 
his ideas fo refined, that he is irritated and vexed 
with every trifle. He is not only affeded 

-._-.-„_._.._--<< with quick difguft, 
From things deform'd, or difarranged, or grofs 
In fpecies." \ 

Even thofe objects, which to others afford very 
confiderable pleafure, are feen by him, with a 
joylefs indifference. But, indeed, almoft every 
avenue to enjoyment is fhut up, by this unhappy 



* Young's Satires. 
-J- Alcenfide's Pleafures of Imagination. 



clifeafc. 



2j6 Rru. Air. Hairs Inquiry concerning 

difeafe. Yet he nurfes it with the greateft 
afliduity ; fancies himfelf formed of nature's 
fineft clay; and looks with contempt, on the 
coarfe delights of his fellow- creatures. By de- 
grees, he becomes unfit for the common duties 
of life, and is cut off from the bleflings, and 
advantages of focial intercourfe. 

But we need not appeal to a few inftances of 
individuals. The prevailing manners of whole 
nations may be brought in proof, that tafte has 
no influence favourable to virtue. It is fcarcely 
neceffary to remark, that Athens was once the 
feat of learning, tafte, and refinement. The 
Jiberal arts were cultivated with the greateft care 
and attention, and rofe to a pitch of perfection, 
which has been generally imitated, but never 
excelled. A tafte for elegance was fo univerfally 
diffufrd among all ranks of people, that even 
a herb-woman, we are told, could detect a very 
fmall deviation from propriety of fpeech.* Tafte 
could not poffibly have a fairer, field, wherein to 
difplay its natural effects. But the hiftory f 
of thofe times, and the moraj lectures of Socrates, 
fufficiently evince, that the Athenians were a 
people, addicted to every kind of fenfual plea- 
fure : at once, refined and voluptuous, licen- 
tious and effeminate, 

* Xenoph. Memorab. paflim. 
f Rollin's Antient Hiftory, vol. IV. 

When 



the Influence of Tafte on Mcralsi 237 

When a tafte for the liberal arts was introduced 
among the Romans, with the rich fpoils of 
Grecian elegance and ingenuity, can we difcover 
in the hiftory of that wonderful people, a con- 
fequent improvement in the habits of virtue? 
You will fay, perhaps, their rugged tempers 
were foftened, and their auftere manners refined. 
But refinement is often remote from virtue.; and 
external graces unconnected with internal beau- 
ties. It is true, they improved in all the ele- 
gances of life; but it is equally true, that their 
native vigour degenerated, into unmanly floth ; 
and the Amor Patri<e> which had carried the 
Roman name fo high, was fucceeded by a mean 
and abject felfifhnefs*. Cato feems to have been 
well aware, that a tafte for the enervating arts of 
Greece, would be productive of thefe mifchiev- 
ous effects-}- ; and endeavoured by every means in 
his power, to ward off the threatened evil. But 
in vain was every remonftrance. A rage for the 
beautiful productions of genius univerfally pre- 
vailed, and bore down all oppofition. And we 
find the latter Cato, in one of his fpeeches re- 
corded by Sallufl, reproaching his countrymen, 
in the following warm expreffions : Per Deos 
immortaks, vos ego appsllo : qui Jemper Domot, 

• Gxsecia capta ferum vi&orem cepit. 

Ho ft. Epif. Lib. II. 
t Lir. Lib. 34. C. 4. 

Villas, 



CjS Rtv. Mr. Hall's Inquiry concerning 

Villas, Signa, Tabula* veflras, fluris quam rem- 
publicam feci/lis *: 

Let me now call your attention to a much 
later period of hi ftory, when tafte revived, in the 
fifteenth century, after a long and gloomy night 
of Gothic ignorance and barbarity. Foftered 
by the favour and liberality of the princes of the 
Medici family, literature and the arts made A 
rapid progrefs. But it does not appear, that 
moral duties made equal advances, or were more 
generally cultivated. Obfcrve, in what unfavour- 
able colours,' the characters of thefe Medici, the 
great patrons of genius and learning, are drawn 
by Lord Orrery, in his Letters from Italy, 
" If," fays he, " you take a view of the princes 
of the Medici, in a group, you will feel reve- 
rence and refpect, at one part of the picture, 
and be tlruck with horror and amazement, at 
the remainder. To revere and honour them, 
you mud confider their generofity, their bene- 
factions to men of learning, their policy, and 
fcientific inftitutions. To view them with 
horror and amazement, you need only liften 
to the undoubted outrages of their private 
lives; by which you will be convinced, that 
few or none of the whole race were endued 
with the fofter pafiions of the human foul. 
I wifh, that in many of their group, their love 

• Salluft. Bell. Catilinar, 

was 



the Influence of tafte on Morals. £3$ 

was not luft ; their good nature, oftentation ; thcii" 
dignity, pride ; and their fenfe, Cunning." 

From thefe, and numberlefs inftances of refined 
depravity, which modern times will furnifh, one 
might almoft be tempted to conclude, that the 
effects of tafte are fo far from being favourable 
to virtue, that they have rather a pernicious ten- 
dency. But I mean not to bring fuch a heavy 
charge asainft a faculty, which, connected with 
reafon and religion, will, doubdefs, enlarge the 
fphere of our innocent enjoyments. I wifh only 
to difprove the affirmative of the proportion, 
and fhew, that tafte cannot reafonably be con- 
fidered as a moral principle of action : that, un- 
afTifted by reafon and good fenfe, it becomes fub- 
fervient to the purpofes of folly and extravagance; 
and that, connected with a bafe and fenfual heart, 
it unhappily ferves to embellifh guilt, and glofs 
over the deformity of vice. 

Let tafte, however, be cultivated, as thefource 
of many elegant pleaiures : but let it ever be 
cultivated, in fubordination to found morality. 
Tafte can ill fupply the want of moral difcipline. 
Where there is no fuperior principle, to check 
the affauks of an alluring temptation, the heart 
muft fall an eafy prey. A truly virtuous cha- 
racter, fet off by a juft tafte, is not only engag- 
ing, but even beneficial to mankind : while, on 
the contrary, a vicious character, however dif- 
linguifhed for tafte and elegance, becomes only, 

the 



240 ® r - Ea/bn on the Xlfe of Acids. 

the more finifhed hypocrite, or the more exqm- 
fite voluptuary. In a word, let virtue form the 
bafe and the fhafc of the column ; and I have 
not the leaft objection, that tafte fhould furniih 
the foliage, and ornament the capital. 



Observations on the Use of Acids in bleach- 
ing of Linen. By Dr. Eason. Read Augufi 7 , 
1782. 

THE ufe of acids, in bleaching of linen, has 
been long known. Formerly milk was 
chiefly employed ; but it had feveral incon- 
veniences. The quantity requifite could fcarcely 
be obtained j its efFedt .was flow; and, contain- 
ing animal matter, it was apt to rot; and fpoil the 
cloth. 

About thirty years ago, it was difcovered, that 
the foffil acids, when properly diluted with water, 
anfwered much better, and would do more in 
a few hours, than animal acids could do in a 
week, in facilitating the whitening of cloth. 

At firft, it was imagined, that the mineral 
acids would be apt to burn, or corrode linen fub- 
ftances, when immerfed in them. But experi- 
ence foon difpelled fuch fears, and convinced 

bleachers, 






in bleaching Linen. 241 

bleachers, that, by proper management, the dan- 
ger was next to none. 

According to the ftrength of the acids they 
muft be mixed with water, fometimes, to feven 
hundred times their bulk. 

The nitrous acid, being the moft corrofive,. 
and moft expensive, has not been ufed. 

The vitriolic acid is that which has univer- 
fally been employed : not becaufe it is prefer- 
able to the muriatic acid, but becaufe it was to 
be bought in large quantities, and at a fmall 
expence. 

The muriatic acid being now fold nearly as 
cheap as the vitriolic, and anfwering in a fupe- 
rior degree, will, in a fhorc time, I. am convinced, 
be generally adopted by bleachers. 

As I muft confefs my ignorance in the art of 
bleaching, it may feem prefumptuous in me to 
hazard a conjecture concerning the manner in 
which acids act in whitening cloth ; but it feems 
probable, that alkaline falts, which are ufed in 
walhing out the oil and glutinous parts of flax, 
on which the green colour depends, depofite an 
earth, in the pores of the cloth. As it is known 
that acids will alfo diflblve the earthy parts of ve- 
getables, that acid fhould be preferred, which will 
keep earthy particles fufpended in water. The 
vitriolic, therefore, is not fo proper ; becaufe, with 
earthy fubftances, it forms immediately a felenite; 

Vol. I. R a fab- 



242 -ZV. Eafon en the Ufe of Acids, 6fr. 

a fubftance only foluble, in a very large quan- 
tity of water. This felenitic matter, adhering 
to the threads of the cloth, will injure it, and 
make it feel hard to the touch, and probably 
is the reafon, why fome linens wear fo badly. 

When the muriatic acid is ufed, no felenite is 
formed. Whatever quantity of -earthy matter is 
difiblved by it, is eafily wafhed out by pure foft 
water, and the cloth having a foft filky feel 
feems to ftrengthen this conjecture. 

As the muriatic acid is now fold at three-pence 
per pound, and the common vitriolic acid at 
four-pence halfpenny, and as the muriatic acid 
will, in proportion, acidulate a larger quantity 
of water than the vitriolic, befides the great 
probability of its anfwering better in whitening 
of cloth, the bleachers in this part of the world 
would do well to give it a fair trial. 



Conjectural 



Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols. 243 



ConjeRural Remarks on the Symbols or Charac- 
ters, employed by Astronomers, to reprefent 
the feveral Planets, and by ^Chemists, to 
exprefs the feveral Metals, in a Letter to 
Thomas Percival, M. D. F. R. S. &c. By 
Martin Wall, M. D. PrxleRor 0/ Chem'iftry 
in the Univerftty of Oxford. Read October 9, 1782. 



S I R, 

I AM extremely apprehenfive, left the following 
obfervations, as relating to a fubject more 
fpeculative than ufeful, may be thought unwor- 
thy of the attention of your very refpectable 
Society ; yet, defirous to ftiew my juft fenfe of 
the compliment, which you have paid me, by 
propofing me as an honorary member, I advance 
them with great deference, hoping you will fup- 
prefs them entirely, if they mould not meet the 
approbation of your correct judgment. 

Whoever engages in the ftudy of Chemiftry, 
cannot but remark, with fome degree of curiofity, 
how extenfively the ufe of fymbols or characters 
has prevailed in this fcience; and is naturally- 
led to enquire, from whence this practice origi- 
nated, and whether the characters ufed are 
merely arbitrary, or have any relation, real or 

R 1 imaginary, 



244 & r ' Watt on the UJe of Symbols, 

imaginary, to the fubftances which they arc 
employed to reprefent- That many of them are 
entirely arbitrary, is commonly fuppofed by 
thofe, whofe knowledge of chemical authors is 
only flight and fuperficial; but the enthufiafm 
of a few, whofe reading has been more extenfive, 
fuggefts a different idea- Every character is, by 
thefe, conceived to convey an accurate defcription 
of the qualities of the fubftance, which it repre- 
lents. It is hardly necelTary to obferve, that 
this opinion is not indirectly fupported by 
Boerhaave, and his commentator Shazv* : and Dr. 
Price f in his account of his extraordinary expe- 
riments on mercury, filver and gold, alTerts, that 
the ancient chemifts either knew or believed, that 
the imperfect metals had a faline principle, which 
they denoted by a crofs attached to their cha- 
racters. It is impofiible, perhaps, to advance 
very far in our enquiries into this fubjeft ; yet 
fome little light may be thrown upon it, by a 
due attention to thofe characters, which are above 
alluded to, thofe by which the metals are re- 
prefented. And firft, it cannot but appear very 
ftriking, that the fymbols employed to reprefent 
the feven metals, which alone were known in 
the earlier ages, are the fame, as thofe which 
were applied by the firft aftronorners, to denote 
the feven planets. The chemifts have, in gene- 

• S/jaiv's Boerbawve, vol. I. p. 68. 
\ Price's "Experiments on Mercury, &c. Preface, p. ir. 

ral, 



Dr. Wall on the U/e of Symbols. 245 

ral, arrogated to themfelves the prior right to 
thefe characters, upon the pretence, that they 
point out mod accurately the various qualities of 
the metals j whereas, to the planets they have no 
kind of relation. Yet, notwithstanding the plau- 
fibility of their arguments, I am inclined to 
entertain a contrary opinion, and to believe that 
the pretenfions of the Aftronomers have a better 
foundation. 

Aftronomy was cultivated in all the oriental 
nations, particularly in iEgypt, Phoenicia and 
Chaldea, in the very earlieft ages, of which we 
have any record. Not only the uniform appear- 
ances of the fixed liars, but even the more 
irregular movements and revolutions of the 
planets, and the peculiar circumftances of colour 
and fplendour, by which they are diftingui fried 
from each other, were accurately marked and 
obferved. 

In the fame period of time, the opinion of 
polytheifm had been gradually diiTeminated : 
and it was extremely natural, that thofe fplendid 
bodies rolling apparently above the earth, in the 
immenfity of fpace, by fuch determined laws, 
fhould be conficiered as the habitations of the 
immortal beings, by whofe immediate influence 
and fuperintendence the affairs of the world were 
conducted. 

Having premifed this, let us now, for the far- 
ther inveftigation of this fubjecT, pay a particular 

K 3 attention 



246 Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols. 

attention to the Mythology of iEgypt, which 
opens an important fund of information, with 
refpect to the hiftory of religion and fcience, in 
thofe early periods : but we muft not expect to 
find the path free from obfcurity and difficulty. 

In that country, the hieroglyphic mode of wri- 
ting was ufed in the greateft extent, and was con- 
nected not only with the fciences, but even with 
religion. By this learned people a circle was 
employed to denote perfection, and particularly 
the infinite perfection of the Supreme Being, 
their OJiris, whofe refidence they conceived to 
be in the great luminary of the day, from whence 
he diftributed the bleffings of light and heat, 
to animate the univerfe. Hence, by a very eafy 
and obvious application, a circle came alfo to be 
employed, as the hieroglyphic of the fun. 

The form of the crefcent moon naturally 
pointed out the fymbol, by which fhe has always 
been reprefented : nor was this planet deftitute 
of a divine inhabitant; but was fuppofed to be 
the palace of the Queen of Heaven, the wife of 
Ofiris, the common mother of mankind. * 

* Imitataque Lunajn 

Cornua fulferunt 

Says Ovid of the ^Egyptian Ifis. Met. Lib. IX. 782. 

That, the idea of the wife of the Supreme Being prefiding 
over the moon, was afterward introduced into Greece, 
appears from a beautiful Medallion of the Samian Juno in 
Mr. Bryant, vol. II. PI. 12. 

Tq 



Dr. Wall en the Ufe of Symbols. itf 

To explain the remainder of the aftronomical 
Symbols, upon the fame principle, it is ncceffary 
previoufiy to remark, that polytheifm in its pu- 
reft form, is nothing more than the deification of 
particular attributes of the Supreme Being, ari- 
fing from the infirmity of human nature, unequal 
to the comprehenfion of one all perfect Being. 
Hence we are not furprized to find, that the two 
planets diftinguifbed by a fplendor, next to that 
of the fun and moon, were alio fuppofed to be 
inhabited by, or at leaft confecrated to the fer- 
vice of the two chief Deities, under a different 
form and name. 

One of thefe planets is known by the title of 
Jupiter, and probably derived both its appel- 
lation and its fymbol, from that part of the 
.^Egyptian mythology, which afierted, that when 
the gods, in the war with the giants, fled from 
the wrath of Typhor into iEgypt, they concealed 
themfelves in the lhapes of various beafts, under 
which they were afterwards worfhipped, and 
particularly Jupiter under that of a ram, at the 
celebrated Libyan Temule of Jupiter Hammon. 
To this circumftance Lucan alludes, in his def- 
fcription of the march of Cato through the wilds 
of Africa;* and Ovid, more diftinctly, in his ac- 

• Ventum erat ad Templum, Libycis quod Gentibus unura 
lnculti Garamantes habent : ftat certior il lie 
Jupiter, ut memorant, led non aut Fulmina vibrans, 
Aut fimllis noftro, fed torcis Cornibus, Hammon. 

Luc. Pharf. L. IX. 511. 

R ^ count 



248 Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols. 

count of the wars of the Gods.* This image of 
Jupiter was not confined iblely to the Libyan 
temple, as we find from lbme paiTages in Hero- 
dotus,f and many remains of ^Egyptian fuper- 
perftition which are ftill preferved. J As Jupiter, 
therefore, was fo frequently worfhipped under 
the form of a ram, or a figure with a ram's head, 
or at leaft wearing the horns of a ram, it is not 
improbable, that the fymbol of this planet was 
taken from thefe images. It might originally 
be the perfect head of a ram, or only one horn. 
The crofs annexed to it (fee fig. 1. in the plate) 
may be an imperfect remainder of the outline of 
the head of the ram, or with more probability 
we may imagine, that it was originally annexec} 

* Bella canit fuperum : falfoque in Honore Gigantas 
Ponit, et extenuat magnorum Fadta Deorum, 
EmifTumque ima de fede Typhoea terra 
Caslitibus fecifle metum, cunctofq dediffe 
Terga fugae : donee feflbs ^Egyptia tellus 
Ceperit, & feptem difcretus in Oftia Nilus. 
Hue quoque terrigenam venifle Typhoea narrat, 
Et fe mentitis fuperos celafle figuris : 
Duxquegregis, dixit, fit Jupiter; unde recurvis 
Nuncquoque formatus Libys eft cum Cornibus Hammon. 

Ovid. Met. V. 319. 
f Herod. Euterp. 42. 

t See a beautiful engraving from a Medallian, repre- 
fenting Helius Serepis in Mr. Bryant's Mythology, vol. II. 
PI. 1 2. and fix prefentations of Jupiter Hammon in Mout- 
Jauccn's Antiquities, PI. 14.. Tom. I. 

to 



Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols. 249 

to convey fome particular information, and was 
afterwards retained in the figure, though the 
intention of its firft application was forgotten. 

The Egyptians, we are told,* expreffed the 
different ftages of the inundation of the Nile, 
by expofing columns or poles, with one or more 
croffes upon them : and this crofs was fometimes 
connected with other fymbols, to denote fome 
other, circumftance, either of the feafon or fitu- 
ation of the planets, which concurred with the 
inundation. Hence, we fee it annexed, not only 
to this fymbol of Jupiter, but alfo to that of 
Venus, Saturn, and Mercury. 

As Jupiter was reprefented under this form, 
it became common in after-times for great 
princes, who wifhed to be confidered as his de- 
fendants, or whofe ambition led them to afpire 
to deification, to affume the fame mark of dis- 
tinction in their medals and flatues, as we fee 
frequently in thofe of Alexander the Great, and 
his fucceflbrs, particularly the Seleucids and 
the Ptolemies. Hence to it was adopted by 
Marc Anthony, when his extravagant attachment 
to the ^Egyptian Queen prevailed upon him, to 
relinquifh the Roman drefs and manners, and 
to alTume the habits and inGgnia of honour, ufed 
by the eaftern nations, f As this practice pre- 

• L'Hirtoire du Ciel par VAbbe Plucbe, Ch. I. §. 8. 
f Cpoie's Medallic Hillory of Imperial Rome, vol. I. 
VI. 7. Fig. u, 12, 16. 

vailed 



2 $o Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols. 

vailed very extend vely in the eaft, may not thofe 
metaphorical exprefilons, relative to temporal 
greatnefs and dignity, fo frequently occurring 
in the oriental languages, and in the Sacred 
Scriptures, have been derived from thence, viz. 
Thou haft lifted up my horn; my horn fh all be exalted 
&c. &c. &c. &c ? 

That brilliant planet, which we call Venus, was 
alfo conndered by the ^Egptians, as facred to the 
Queen of Heaven, who, by them, was known by 
the name of Ifis, and in different countries by al- 
moft innumerable different appellations. It would 
lead me very far into the depths of mythology, to 
prove that the Goddefs, intended by alj thefe ap- 
pellations, was the ftme, and that the lfis of the 
/Egyptians was the Venus of the Greeks arid Ro- 
mans. * To thofe who are converfant with rtudits 
of this nature, hardly any proof is neceffary. 
Accordingly, it may be fuppofed, that the aftro- 
nomers aflumed, as the fymb<>l of this planet, the 
Sijlrum of Ifis, which we are told by antiquarians, f 
was a fmall oblong circle of metal, croflcd by 
iron rods, with a handle (as in fig. i. of the plate) 
by which it might be held ; and that it was ufed, 

* See liont faucet % Antiq. Part If. B. II. Ch. 2. and 
UAbbePluche Hilt, des Ciels. Ch. II. §.'3, 11, 12, 13, 

14. »5- 

-J- See Mcntfauccn% Ant;. Tom. II. p. 287. & Abbe 
Flucbe Hift. des Ciels, &c. Ch. II. §, 3. $ PI. 17. 

at 



Dr. Wall on the XJJe of Symloh. 25 1 

at feafts, to point out, by exact cadences, the 
movements of the fongs and dances. There 
might be, therefore, a peculiar propriety in af- 
fuming this instrument, as the fymbol of that 
planet, which was fuppofed to be peculiarly fa- 
voured by the refidence of the Goddefs of mirth 
and love j and fo often appears in its greateft: 
fplendour and beauty, in thofe evening hours, 
when the heat, the hurry and labours of the day, 
give place to coolnefs, tranquillity and peace, or 
to mirth and joy, the fongand the dance*. 

The 

* The Roman Poets have many beautiful allufions to the 
pleafures which attend the rifing of the evening ft ar. 

_ ...-- Cum frigidus aera Vefper 

Temperat, & Saltus reficit jam rofcida Luna, 
Littoraque ; halcyonem refonant, & acanthida dumi. 

Virg. G. III. 336. 

Venerifque falubre Sidus. Lucan Pbarf Lib. I. 66 1. 

Vefper adeft, Juvenes, confurgite ; Vefper Olympo 
Expedlata diu vix tandem Lumina tollit ; 
Surgere jam tempus. Catulli Garen Nupt. I. 

Hefpere, qui Cselo lucet jucundior Ignis? 
Qui defponfa tua firmes connubia flamma 
Qua; pepigere Viri, pepigerunt ante Parentes, 
Nee junxere prius, quam fe tuus extulit ardor. 
Quid datur a Divis felici optatius Hora. Id. V. 24. 

It is well known that this planet is often a morning fiar. 
yirgil has given a charming defcription of her rifing in this 
ftation, and has taken particular pains to point her put, as 
the favourite of the goddefs Venus. 

Qualij 



252 Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols. 

The flow movement of that planet, which is 
called Saturn, would naturally fugged, that he 
was under the patronage of fome Deity, diftin- 
guifhed by fuperior gravity and wifdom ; and 
thence it was fuppofed to be the residence of 
the mod ancient of the Gods, or time itfelf. 
Hence, as its fymbol, they affumed the fcythe, 
or the fickle, the particular attribute of that 
Deity. (See fig. 3. in the drawing). He is ex- 
prefsly called by Ovid, Falcifer Deus, (Faltor, lib, 
I. 233.) and Juvenal fays that he affumed the 
fickle, when he was deprived of the imperial 
crown, by his fon Jupiter* 

..--... prinfquam 

Sumferit agrellem, pofito Diademate, falcem 
Saturnus fugiens. Juv. Sat. XIII. 38. 

Hence he is commonly reprefented in medals 
and ftatues, holding an inftrument of this kind 
in his hand *. 

The red fiery appearance of the planet Mars> 
particularly, when he is in his moft perfect 



Qualis ubi Oceani perfufus Lucifer unda, 
Quern Venus ante alios aftrorum diligit ignes, 
Extulitos facrum Cselo, tenebrafque refolvit. 

Virg. Mn. VIII. 589. 

* See Montfaucon, Tom. I. PI. 5. Fig. 1. and Bryant's 
Mythology, vol. II, p. 259, 

oppofition, 






Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols 253 

oppofition to the fun, and at the fame time in 
his perigeon,* might lead the early aftronomers 
to confider that planet as the refidence of the 
God of war. Hence we need not be folicitous- 
to feek for authorities, from ancient hiftory or 
poetry, to explain the fymbol of this planet, 
which is obvioufly borrowed from two of the 
chief instruments of war, the fpear and the 
fliield, (fee fig. 4. in the plate.) It is worthy 
of remark, that we are told by Varro, that the 
Romans worfhipped Mars under the fimple re- 
prefentation of a fpear, before they had any 
ftatuesor images of their Gods f. 

The rapid revolution and movements of the 
planet known by the name of Mercury, J more 
particularly as he never moves, but a fmall 

* It is not impoflible that Luton, in the following paflage, 
alluded to this fplendid appearance of Mars, when thefe 
circumftances occur in its revolution, where he defcribes it 
as reigning alone in the Heavens, giving dreadful omens 
of the calamities impending over the Roman ftate. 

-- To, qui flagrante minacem 

Scorpion incendis cauda, chelafque peruris, 
Quid tantum, Gradive, paras? nam mitis in alto 
Jupiter occafu prcmitur, Venerifque falubre 
Sidus hebet, motuque celer Cyllenius haeret, 

Et Caelum Mars folus habet - 

Imminet armorum rabies, fcrrique poteftas 
Confundet jas omne. Luc. Pharf. Lib. I. 65$. 

f See Montfaucon, Tom. I. B. III. p. 125. 
I Cyllenius celer. Liican utfupra. 

diftance 



254 ® r - Watt on the W e °f Symbols. 

diftance from the fun, and returns quickly, &t 
if engaged in the immediate execution of his 
commands, might lead the firft aftronomers to 
fuppofe, that this planet was facred to the Deity, 
whom their mythology had made the fervant, 
officer or mefienger of the Gods; and, therefore, 
as its fymbol, they chofe the Caduceus the ftaff of 
office, which that Deity was fuppofed to bear, 
(fee fig. 5. in the plate.) 

If this attempt, to explain the origin of thefe 
fymbols, be admitted as plaufible, the credit 
of their invention, and their firft application 
muft be afcribed to aftronomy. But a greater 
difficulty now arifes, to point out, by what 
principles the chemifts were led to appropriate 
them to their art ; an undertaking much more 
perplexed, and, which my attempts to illuftrate, 
will require all the indulgence and favour of 
this learned Society. I give up entirely their 
pretenfions to the invention of thefe chara&ers, 
and, therefore, (hall not pay any attention here 
to the attempts, which Boerhaave and others have 
made to explain them ; but (hall proceed upon 
a quite different plan. 

The peculiar fplendour of the fun and moon 
had without doubt been long noticed ; and long 
before the introduction of chemical fcience, the 
language of poetry (and in the earlieft ages al. 
mod all language was poetical, that is, figurative) 
had difenminated that of the former by epithets, 

borrowed 



"Dr. Wall on the life of Symbols: 25$ 

borrowed from the analogous fplendour and co- 
lour of gold ; and that of the latter, by thofe 
borrowed, from the purer white luftre of the moon. 
A few inftances, out of many, of their metaphori- 
cal mode of exprefllon, are inferted in the margin*- 
The frequent ufe of thefe epithets might eafily 
lead an enthufiaftic mind to conceive, that a real 
analogy and correfpondence fubfifted, between 
thefe planets and the metals. This opinion to a 
flrong and fertile imagination (improved too by 
the aftrological notions, which might at the fame 
time prevail, concerning the real or virtual emana- 
tions of the planets) might feem to receive con- 
firmation, from innumerable circumftances, and 
ultimately fugged the employment of the fame 
fymbolical characters for the metals, which had 
before been appropriated to the planets. Hence 



* Aurati Solis radii. Virg. JEn. XII. 164. 
Solis aurata corona. Statii Thab. III. 414. 
Sol auricomus. Val Flace IV. 95. 

Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea fummse 
Curvatura rots, fays Ovid in his defcription of the 
chariot of the fun. Metam. Lib. II. 107. 

Clara mi cante auro— of the palace of the fun. Id. line 2. 
Sol aureus. Virg. G. I. 232 — G. IV. 50. 
Niveos Luna levarit equos. Ov. Fall. IV. 374. 
Nee Candida curfum Luna negat. Virg. JEn. VII. 8. 
Faveas; Dea Candida, dixi. 

Ovid Epift. Leander Heroni LXI # 
Fulges radiis argentea puris. Id. LXXI. 

gold 



2 5 6* Dr. Wall on the XJfe of Symbols. 

gold came to be typified, by the circle of the fun, 
and filver by the crefcent of the moon. The 
number of the metals, at that time known, agree- 
ing exactly with the number of planets, would 
lead to an extenfion of this analogy to the whole* 
and every metal would eafily be found, or fuppofed 
to have a relation to one or other of the (even 
planets, and receive as its mark, the aftronomical 
character of that planet. Some circumflances, 
which might give a foundation for thefe fuppofi- 
tions, fhall now be enumerated. Copper was found, 
principally, or in the moft confiderable quantities, 
in the ifland of Cyprus, and the manufacture of 
brafs was not only invented there, but carried to a 
degree of perfection unknown in other countries} 
infomuch that we are informed by Pliny,* that 
either the metal derived its name from the ifland, 
or the ifland from the metal. As this ifland 
was fuppofed to be under the immediate domi- 
nion of Venus,f an obvious connection was dif- 

* Nat. Hift. Lib. XXXIV. 2. 

KAt^sT, rrnigeilo* a.(v Atft>v<i>t1f ' AQfohrns. 

Cyprus autem ortum verfus Pamphylium intra finum 

Albuitur, amabilis Urbs Diones Veneris. 

Well's Dionjfius, \z\0. 

Ipfa Paphum fublimis abit, fedefque revifit 
Lastafuas: ubi Templum illi, centumque fabaeo 
Thurecalent arx, fertifquerecentibus halant. 

Virg. JEn. I. 419. 

covered 



Br. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols* 237 

covered, which juftified the application of the 
fytnbol of the planet to the metal. 

The Ufe of Iron, in framing the inftruments of 
war, prefents fo finking a relation, between this 
metal and the God Mars, that we need not won- 
der, that the fymbol of that planet was applied 
to diftinguifh iron. 

The mobility and unfixable nature of the me- 
tallic fluid §htick/ilver 3 was naturally, by minds 
thus difpofed to form analogies, compared with 
the rapid movements of the planet Mercury, and 
accordingly, the fymbol of the planet was appro- 
priated to the metal. 

On the other hand, the flow motion of Saturn, 
the coldnefs of his fituation, fo far removed from 
the Sun, * and his dull afpecl, which obtained 
him the epithets of frigida, gelida, rigens f 
prefented a fufficient refemblance to the obvious, 
as well as the medicinal qualities of Lead, to 
countenance the fuppofition of a relation be- 
tween the metal and the planet, and to autho- 
rize the application of the fymbol of Saturn to 
lead. 



* Hence Lucan, 

Sommo il frigida Cailo 

Stella nocens nigros Saturni accenderit Ignes. 

Pharfal. B. I. 651 



• 



t Plinii Nat. Hift. L. II. C. 6. 
Vol. I S The 



258 T)r. Wall on the life of Symbols t 

The analogy being extended thus far, withou? 
any great violence, the remaining fymbol of 
Jupiter was applied to Tin, for which, the bright 
iplendour of the planet and of the metal, might 
feem to give a plaufible reafon. * 

This metal was not found in any of the coun- 
tries of the ancient world, which were com- 
monly known, and eafy of accefs. It was im- 
ported by the Phoenicians from fome of thofe 
regions, with which they traded in their voyages 
beyond the Pillars of Hercules ; particularly, it 
was faid to be brought from fome iflands, which 
were called CaJJlterides. Whether the metal re- 
ceived the appellation of CaJJiteron, (or CqJJiteros t 
as Homer calls it) from thefe iflands, or they 
were fo called from the metal, is uncertain ; nor 
is it lefs uncertain, what thefe iflands were, and 
where they were fituated. Some place them on 
the weftern coafts of Spain, Portugal, or Africa : 
others fuppofe them to have been, the Scilly 
iflands near the Land's end, in Cornwall.f It is 

not, 

* It may be remarked, that Homer gives to Tin the fame 
epithet pawoj, which he frequently ufes, to exprefs the 
bright fplendour of the moon, and planets. Iliad ^ 361. 

f In Wells's edition of Diony/lus' Geography, it is pofi- 
tively aiTerted, that the CaJJlterides were fituated near the 
Land's end in Cornwall, and that they had their name 
from the Greek word Kacro-flepov, tin, which they pro- 
duced in great plenty. (Dionyjii Geograph. par Wells.) 

Borlafc 



Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols. 259 

not, therefore, impofiible, that the Phoenician 
Navigators, who were always remarkably fecret 
concerning the country from whence they ob* 
tained their tin, * might infinuate, that this 
metal was difcovered to them by the Deity, 
who prefided over the fea, (not the Neptune of 
the Greeks and Romans, but the more ancient 
Oceanus, who was, in Egypt, Phoenicia, and 
even Greece, in its earlieft periods, confounded 
with the Supreme Being.)f 

May I therefore be allowed to conjecture, that 
there was a prevailing tradition, that Tin was 
difcovered to the Phoenicians by Jupiter himfelf ? 

Bcrla/e admits the truth of this pofition in general, 
but infinuates, that, probably, the name was derived from 
a Phoenician word of fimilar found and import. 

Borlafe, Antiquities of Cornwall, Ch. VII. 

* See fome remarkable inftances of this difpofition in 
Ecr'afe's Antiquities, Ch. VII.* 

f Some of the ancient Greek writers exprefsly call 
Oceanus by the titles of the Supreme Being. We have 
in Homer the following expreffions : 

Oceani, qui quidem Parens omnibus eft. 

Horn. Iliad. XIV. 246. 

£lxicttoi>Tt Qtui yitto-ir. Id. V. 200. 

Oceanumque Deorum Parentem. 
And Plutarch, in his Ifis and Ofiris, fays direftly 
¦« 'ilK.ta.yoy Oatf^x, that Ofiris and Oceanus were the fame." 
See furth«r in Bryant's AccoQnt of Noah. V. II. 269. 

S 2 If 



a 6o Dr. Wall on the Ufe of Symbols. 

If it were pofiible to prove, that any traces of 
fuch an opinion as this fubfifted at the time 
when the Alchemical doctrines began to be pre- 
valent, we ftiould not be at a lofs to determine, 
whyTin was honoured with the fymbol of Jupiter. 
But on this point, I have no other fupport than 
mere conjecture, which I fubmit, with the reft of 
the Dlffertation, to the candour of the Society, 
hoping they will not mark with the feverity of 
critical accuracy or cenfure, my endeavours to 
deferve the honour of becoming one of their 
members. Before I conclude, allow me to 
mention, that in the above dictation, though 
I might frequently have drawn my illuftrations 
frorrfthe Greek authors, I have principally con- 
fined myfelf to the Roman, and thofe the moft 
common and familiar, as fuppofing thefe were 
moft likely to be known, if any were known, 
to the Alchemical authors, who-firft transferred 
to the metals the ancient aftronomical characters 
of the planets. 

I am, dear Sir, 

With great Refpect, 
Your fincere Friend 
and obedient Servant, 

M. WALL, 



Remarks 



Dr. Falconer's Remarks on the, &c, 26 1 



Remarks on the Knowledge of the Ancients, 
By William Falconer, M. D. F. R. S. 
Communicated by Dr. Percival. Read ' Oclober i6 t 
1782. 



HP H E fuperiority of the Moderns over the 
Ancients, in moft branches of Natural 
Philofophy, is generally received as an acknow- 
ledged truth, and is, probably, well founded. 
Neverthelefs, I am inclined to think, that the 
ignorance of the ancients has been over-rated, 
and, that feveral things were known to them, 
at lead as facts, and matters of obfervation, 
which are not apprehended to be fo, by the 
generality of people. Much learning and indus- 
try has been beftowed on this Subject, by the 
Rev. Mr. Dutens, in his very ingenious Inquiry 
into the Origin of the Difcoveries attributed 
to the Moderns, to which I beg leave to add 
a few remarks, that have occurred to me in the 
courfe of reading. And 

I. I believe it is efteemed to be an origi- 
nal difcovery of Dr. Black, That water which 
had been boiled was more eafily frozen, than 
water that had not undergone that operation. 

S 3 But, 



t6i Dr. Falconer s Remarks on the 

But, That water which had been heated, was 
by that means rendered eafier to be cooled, was 
well known to the ancients. 

Ariftotle obferves, That water freezes the 
fooner for having been before heated ; and, that 
this fadl: was even known to fome barbarous 
people upon the Euxine Sea, who made ufe of 
Ice as a kind of cement for their huts; and that the 
•water frozen for this purpofe, was firft heated, in 
order* that it might concrete the fooner." Pliny-f- 
alfo mentions it as a difcovery of Nero, to boil 
the water that was intended to be frozen', as that 
haftened its concretion. 

Athenasus J alfo remarks, <c that in the Ifle Ce- 
molus they placed water in their Refrigeratories 
which had been heated by the rays of the fun, and, 
that they reproved their fervants, if the water 
they provided for freezing was not previoufly 
heated." 

There is to this purpofe, a curious paffage 
in Hippocrates, in the fixth book and fourth fec- 
tion of the Epidemics ; which, though I am 
unable to clear up, I think has fome reference 
to this fubject. The words are as follows. 

Y^e aipe-^riBiii, to pin v; ai^r-at tot cttcu, to »e /*>? tuit^.tot 

* Ariftot. Meteorol. L. I. Cap. 12. _ 
+ Plinii Hilt. Nat. L. XXXI. Cap. 3. 
I Athensn. Lib. III. p. 123. 124. Edit. Cafaubon. 

This 



Knowledge of the Ancients, 26 3 

This direction is relative to the preparation 
of the water, to be drank by the patient, which 
is ordered to be, fuch as has been boiled ; and 
part of the preparation was performed, with the 
water expofed to the air, and part, with the verTel 
clofed iip. * 

The firft, referred to the boiling or heating 
the water, and the latter, to the cooling of itj 
as I fuppofe, it was boiled, to throw out or expel 
the air, and then doled up, that it might not 
recover it again when cooling, which would 
have retarded its refrigeration, according to the 
modern theory. Galen, though he does not 
explain the meaning quite in the f fame manner 
as I have done, imagines, that Hippocrates al- 
ludes to the boiling of water, that was afterwards 
to be drank cold, as, in the fentencejuft preceding 
the former, cold things had been recommended. 
Galen accounts for the obfeurity of this paffage, 
by informing us, that thefe works of Hippocrates 
were not written for publication, but as private 
notes to arTift the memory. 

* When water is boiled, car* fhould be taken that air 
fhould be allowed admiffion to the veflel, that the veflel be 
not quite full, and that it have a cover. Fair's Tranfl. 

t Galen, however, feems to think, that the water was 
to be boiled in an open veflel, and, when let down into 
fh« Refrigeratory, to be clofed up, fo as to exclude all air. 
C»a!en Comm. in Lib. VI. §. 4. Epidem. Hippoci". 

S 4 Qalen, 



264 Dr. Falconer's Remarks on the 

Galen himfelf was perfonally well acquainted 
with this effect of boiling, in difpofing water to 
cool more rapidly, and to a greater degree. 
<c When," fays he, " we wifh to render water as 
cool as poffible, we firft heat it, then furround with 
fnow the vefifel containing it, or, if fnow be wan- 
ting, we place it in the well or ftream of a fpring, 
and thus its temperature is more eafily changed." 

This he afcribes to the rarefaction the water 
had before undergone, which is evidently not 
the true caufe, as, upon cooling, it would be as 
much condenfed as before. Perhaps, the true 
caufe may be, what is generally afligned, the dif- 
charge of the air. But how does this operate 
in promoting the refrigeration ? Is it, that after 
the water has been freed of its air, any part 
of its latent heat has flown off with it, and thus 
rendered it more eafily acceffible to cold ? Or, 
is the refrigeration more eafy, on account of the 
difcharge of air ; as the air, being united with 
the water, and requiring to be difengaged in 
freezing, might, by its attraction to the water, 
require more cold to difengage it, than would 
have frozen the water, had it not had that at- 
traction to overcome ? 

It muft, however, be remarked, that Galen not 
only fpeaks of water that has been previoufly 
heated, being more eafy to be frozen., but alfo 
fays, fuch water is more eafily cooled, even to 

any 



Knowledge of the Ancients." 265 

any inferior degree: a fact worthy to be afcer- 
tained by experiment. 

II. I believe the facl, Of the production of cold 
by the evaporation of fluids, is efteemed a modern 
difcovery, as it juftly may be : but it ftill ap- 
pears (though the modern difcoverers were not 
acquainted with it) that it was familiarly known 
to the ancients, and not only to the Greeks and 
Romans, but the Egyptians alfo. 

Athensus mentions, " that Protagorides, in 
defcribing the navigation of Antiochus upon 
the Nile, or Euphrates, relates the method ufed 
in that country, of cooling liquor, which was, by 
firft heating it by expofure to the fun, and then 
draining it, and fetting it in earthen jars in the 
higheft, and moft open and expofed part of the 
building, whilft two boys were employed all the 
night, in keeping the outfides of the jars moift. 
After this, they preferved the coolnefs of its 
temperature, by covering the jars with ftraw. 
This, fays he, cooled the water to fo great 
a degree, that they felt no want of ice." * 

Galen fays, the method of cooling water, ufed at 
Alexandria, was as follows : " About fun-fet, they 
poured water which had been firft heated, into jars, 
which theyhungupinthe higheftpartsof the build- 
ings, with the windows open, oppofite to that point 
from whence the wind blew. Before fun rife, they 

* Athcn. p. 124. 

placed 



266 Dr. Falconer's Remarks on the 

placed the jars upon the ground, and moiftened 
the outfide, and covered them with cool and 
fucculent leaves, as of lettuce, &c. in order that 
the water might retain the cool temperature it 
had thus acquired." * 

The modern method of making ice in the 
pad Indies, refembles the above in many refpects. 
Pits are dug in large open plains, places moft 
expofed to circulation of air, and of confequence, 
to evaporation : thefe are ftrewed with reeds, in 
order to admit the circulation of ajr on all fides, 
and on thefe are placed (hallow pans of earth 
filled with water, and the texture of thefe pans is 
fo porous, as to admit the water to percolate 
through them, in fuch a manner, as to keep the 
outfide always moid, and of confequence, pro- 
ducing cold by evaporation. The water ufed 
for this purpofe has alfo been previoufly boiled. 
It is needlcfs to remark, how much this procefs 
refembles thofe before quoted, and how probable 
it is, from the immutability of ancient manners, 
that it was a cuftom derived frorri very remote 
antiquity. 

III. Some other difcoveries, fuch as, " The folu- 
tion of water in air, and that this folution is aflifted 
by heat and agitation," appear not to have been 
unknown to the ancients, though their notions, 
hereupon were far from clear. 



w 



Galen Comm. in Lib. VI. Epidem. Hippoc. Comm. IV. 

Thq 



Knowledge of the Ancients. 267 

tc The moifture, fays Ariftotle, that is about the 
earth, being converted into vapours by the rays 
of the fun, afcends. When it has arifen, the heat, 
by whofe affiftance it had afcended, leaves the 
vapour (or, as Dr. Black would fay, becomes 
fenfible) and then, the vapour again afTumes a 
confidence, and, from being in the form of air, 
becomes water. Meteorol. L. L C. 9. 

<f The reafon, fays Ariftotle, why dew and hoar 
froft do not concrete in elevated fituations, is, 
that in them the air is much asitated, which 
diflblyes* the confidence of the water. Ibidem, 
Cap. 10. 

Dr. Black's doclrine of Latent Heat, feems not 
to have been altogether unknown to the ancients. 

" Snow, fays Ariftotle, cannot be formed, with- 
out the cold prevails, much heat Mill remaining 
in it. For in a cloud, or vapour, there is much 
heat which remains of that fire, that has abforbed 
the moifture from the earth." Ariftotle here 
mentions, that heat or fire was ftjll contained in 
the cloud or vapour, and fo far is agreeable to 
Dr. Black's fyftem ; but the latter difcovered, that 
when the condenfation took place, the heat, before 
latent, then became fenfible. 

* O; het>.vu r*iv rotcevr/iv ovtra.a\y. 

fi. B. Svrac-tj means the confidence, or folid form of 
any thing, in its primary Signification, and is. often applied 
to water. Vide £,ex. Budxi. Vox Iireo-i? 

IV. The 



26 8 Dr. Falconer's Remarks on the 

IV. The ancients perfectly knew the reafon» 
why the air near the earth was more heated, than 
in higher fituations. Ariftotle explains this, from 
the reflection of the folar * rays from the furface 
of the ground ; which caufe is alfo afiigned by 
Seneca, f This is, I believe, generally underftood 
to be a difcovery of Sir Ifaac Newton. 

V. Ariftotle J afllgns a caufe for the fudden 
concretion of Hail Stones, to which he very pro- 
perly attributes their largenefs of fize, which I 
have never before met with, and yet is, perhaps, 
the true one. He obferves, " that hail generally 
falls mod plentifully in hot weather :" and it is 
to this previous heat, which muft have affected 
the vapour, and the water contained in it, that he 
afcribes the fudden congelation of the hail, in 
the fame manner, as water, previoufly heated, is 
found to freeze more eafily and fuddenly. 

VI. The fact || likewife, of the reparation of air 

from 

* i Ei; TOY O.VU TQ7T0V piTlAoV OKT« \J/fp£fO» C*l« TO ?l>iylH» 

t.xn Taj ctita Trj; y>}? rm a.xrtva>v a.va.xKa.£ii<;. 

Meteor, Lib, I. C. 12. 

-f- quod radii Solis a terra refiliunt et in fe recurrunt, 

Horum duplicatio proxima quasque a terris calefacit. Qua* 
ideo plus habent teporis, quia folem bis fentiunt. 

Seneca Nat. Qujeft. L. IV. Sett. S» 

X Meteorolog. De Grandine. 
|| to ixiv atuTK \a. pn gov kou kovQov xxt yXvKV exxpiverai y.xi ct<pxv 
ttirai, to ot bohao'ecrTetTov xeci o r ra&iAU<itaTa.T»v huirtrau. 

Hipp, de Aere Aquis et locis. §. XX. 



Knowledge of the Ancients. 269 

from water, by freezing the latter, appears to 
have been not unknown to the ancients. Pro- 
bably, this is what was meant by Hippocrates, 
when he fays, " that the clear, light, and fweec 
parts of the water, are diffipated by freezing;" 
an opinion which Ariftotle feems to have adopted, 
probably from this fource. 

Aulus Gellius* explains this paffage of Ari- 
ftotle, as if the air was prefTed, as it were, from 
water, by its concretion j and Macrobius f ex- 
prefies the fame, in terms more plain and dif- 
tinct, and feems to fay, that it was necefTary for 
water to part with its air, in order to its con- 
gelation. 

VII. It is often imagined, that the facl, Of water 
rifing to its level in pipes, was a modern dif- 

Aai Tf a~o '/}oio$ y.sti Y-^vcTaJ-.y.av v^ara, <p<zv>.u. terra ; oti Karros 
vSzjoe, irr.yr.'y.iMiL To hfTnoTa-roii atxirynrat xki xd<poTctTov £|«]u.t£ei, 

Arift. Meteor. 

* Quoniam cum aqua frigore aeris duratur, et coit, 
necefle eft fieri evaporationern, et quandam quafi auram 
tenuiilimam exprimi ex ea et emanare: id autem, inquir. 
in ealeviflimum eft quod evaporatur. 

Aul. G«ll. Nod. Ateic. IX. 5. 

f Omnis aqua, inquit, habet in fe Aeris tenuiflimi por- 
tionem, qua falutaris eft : habetque terream fsecem, qua eft 
corpulenta poft terram. Cum ergo Aeris frigore et gclu, 
coafta calefcit, necefle eft per evaporationern velut ex- 
primi ex ilia Auram tenuiflimam, qua difcedente conveniat 
in coagulum. 

Macrob. Saturn. L. VII. C. 12. 

covery; 



2 j o Dr,- Falconer's Remarks, &c. 

covery } but it appears to be by no means fat 
and that the Aqu£edu6r.s built at fuch vaft expence 
for the conveyance of water, were not con- 
flrufled for want of knowing, that pipes would 
anfwer a fimilar purpofe, but from the perfua- 
fion, that the water 3 in pipes of lead efpecially, 
was lefs wholefome, than water conveyed in an 
open channel. This appears very clear, from 
the following pafTage in Palladius.* " Si quis 
mons interjedus occurrerit, aut per latera ejus 
aquam ducemus obliquam, aut ad aqufe caput 
fpeluncas librabimus, per quarum ftru&uram 
perveniat. Sed fi fe vallis interferat, ere&as 
pilas, vel arcus ufque ad aquse jufta veftigia con- 
ftruemus, aut plumbeis fiftulis claufam dejici 
patiemur, et explicata valle confurgere. Ulti- 
ma ratio eft, plumbeis fiftulis ducere, quse aquas 
noxias reddunt." Vitrivius + expreffes the fame, 
though in terms rather more obfcure ; and Pliny$ 
gives particular directions on the fubjecl, 

• Pallad. Menf. Auguil. 
f Vitruv. L. VIII. C. 7, 
% L. XXXI. C. 6. 



An 



Dr. Falconer tin the Influence i Gfa 27 i 



dn Enquiry concerning the Influence of the 
Scenery" of a Country on the Manners of 
its Inhabitants. By William Falconer, 
M. D. F. R. S. Read Oclober 23, 1782. 



IT is an ancient maxirti in Philofophy, attri* 
buted to Ariftotle, and generally acquiefced 
in, That all mental ideas were primarily fug- 
gefted, by fenfible objects, through the medium 
of the fenfes. Whether this opinion be univer- 
fally true, is not here meant to be difcuffed : 
but, that external objects influence our actions 
and conduct, and even direct our fpeculativc 
fentiments, is too evident to bear difpute. 

Animated beings, and, far above the reft, the 
human fpecies, are the moft powerful in pro- 
ducing thefe effects. We are naturally led to 
adopt the paflions, and, to a certain degree, to 
imitate the character of thofe, to whofe com- 
pany and converfation we are daily habituated » 
and this difpofition is fo potent, that even error 
and prejudice are often introduced, and almoft 
voluntarily entertained, by thofe, whofe character 
and underftanding, in other inftances, Ihould 
feem to afford the mod complete fecurity againft 
fuch examples of human frailty, 

' Alefs 



i-ji Dr. Falconer on the Influence of the Scenery 

A lefs potent, but a fomewhat fimilar influence* 
is exerted by inanimate objects. Scenes of hor- 
ror, even though compofed of lifelefs materials, 
impart gloomy and terrible ideas to the mind j 
and thofe of pleafure tend, on the contrary, to 
exhilarate and refrefli it. Hence we may infer, 
that the afpect or face of a country might con- 
tribute, in fome meafure, towards the formation 
of the manners, and character of the people. 

The immediate and dired effect of the fight 
of objects, of either of the kinds above-men- 
tioned, would be, I apprehend, but weak ; but 
we fhould confider, that they mutt, from their 
nature, be almoft constantly operating ; and by 
their repeated adtion may make amends for the 
fiightnefs of the imprefiions, distinctly confidered* 

As it is the natural property of beautiful ob- 
jects to communicate pleafurable ideas to the 
mind, and to elevate the fpirits, we may from 
thence infer, that the view of a fertile, pleafant, 
and cultivated country, would infpire fentiments 
of delight and fatisfaction into thofe accuftomed 
to furvey it. A cultivated garden was the fcene 
of delight, felected by that celebrated patron of 
fenfual pleafure Epicurus ; and the exhilarating 
effects produced upon the mind by the * furvev 

of 

• .-_..._.-- and now is come 

Into the blifsful field, thro' groves of Myrrh, 

And flowering odours, Caflla, Nard, and Balm, 

A wildernefs of fweets, for Nature here 

Wanton 3 



of a Country on its Inhabitants, 273 

¦of a beautiful fcenery of country, are noticed 
by feveral of the poets, and particularly by 
Milton. 

Is it not hence probable, that fuch a view 
would tend to infpire permanent chearfulnefs of 
temper, into thofe daily accuftomed to behold 
it, both, as it prefents great variety of fubjects of 
attention and admiration, and as it fills the mind 
with reprefentations of pleafing objects ? 

Wantons as in her prime, and plays at will 
Her virgin fancies, pouring forth more fweet, 
Wild above rule, or art, enormous blifs, 

Paradife Loft, Book V. 
.._.....-._. about me round I faw, 
Hill, dale, and ihady woods, and funny plains, 
And liquid lapfe of murmuring ftreams: by thefe, 
Creatures that liv'd, and mov'd, and walk'd, and flew : 
Birds on the branches warbling : all things fmil'd 
With fragrance, and with joy my heart o'erflow'd. 

Paradife Loft, Book VIII. 
Straight mine eye hath caught new pleafures, 
While the landfcape round it meafures, 
Ruflet lawns, and fallows gray, 
Where the nibbling flocks do ftray : 
Mountains, on whofe barren bread 
The labouring clouds do often reft : 
Meadows, trim with dailies pied : 
Shallow brooks, and rivers wide : 
Towers, and battlements it fees, 

Bofom'd high in tufted trees. 

Milton's Allegro. 
Why fit we ht, when Phofphor ftrines fo clear, 
Andlavifti nature paints the purple year ? 

Pope's Firft Partoral. 

Vol. I. T Cicero 



274 Dr. Falconer on the Influence of the Scenery 

Cicero, in his Letters to Atticus,* fpeaks of 
the pleafures of a garden, as the bed remedy for 
grief and concern of rnind ; and in one of his 
philofophical dialogues, j- he recommends atten- 
tion to the natural beauties of a fine and culti- 
vated country, as the proper ftudy of the calm 
and ferene period of old age. 



* Deinde etiam ad kxtx&ow maiftitiamque medendam 
nihil mihi reperiri poteft aerius. 

Cic. Epift, ad Attic. l>. XIII. 
¦f Quid de pratorum viriditate, aut arborum ordinibus, 
aut vinearum olivetorumque fpecie, dicam ? Brevi pre- 
eidam. Agro bene culto nil poteft efle, nee ufu uberius, 
nee fpecie ornatius, ad quern fruendum non modo non 
retardat, verum etiam invitat atque alleclat Seneclus. 

Cicero, de Seneft. §. LIU. 
Vobis mehercule Martis viris cavenda et fugienda im- 
primis amoenitas eit Afiae, tantum hx peregrins voluptates 
ad extinguendum vigorem animorum poflunt. 

Li<oii t L. XXVU. 
Loca amoena voluptaria facile in otio feroces militum 
animos molliverant. 

Salluft. Bell. Catilin. 
Itaque ut frugum femina mutato fole degenerant, fie ilia 
genuina feritas eorum Afiatica amoenitate mollita eft. 

Flor. L. II. C. If. 
EfFeminat animos amasnitas nimia ; nee dubie aliquid ad 
corrumpendum vigorem poteft regio. Fortior miles ex con- 
fragofo venit. 

Seneca;. Epift. L. I. Ep. 51. 
N. B. The word amoenus is applicable to what is pleafant 
or agree?ble to the eye, in place or fituation, and, of courfe, 
fefers to the fcenery or face of the country. 

It 



of a Country on its Inhabitants. 27 5 

It is, however, probable, that the pleafures in- 
fpired by fuch a fcenery as is above alluded to, 
which is rather of a luxurious tendency, may 
coincide with the effects of the climate, in which 
fuch profpects are moftly produced, in contribu- 
ting to weaken and effeminate the mind and dif- 
pofition. However whimfical this notion may 
appear, it has been adopted by writers, in the 
higheft efteem for underftanding and difcernment. 
Perhaps, for the fame reafon, a beautiful and or- 
namented country has been thought to be favour- 
able to the fofter paffions. " Love," fays Agatho 
in the banquet of Plato, " refides not in a body 
or foul, or any other place, where flowers never 
fpring; or, if they do fpring, where they are 
fallen, and the fpot quite deflowered. But, 
wherever a fpot is to be found flowry and fra- 
grant, he there feats himfelf, and fettles his 
abode." The beauty of the country, mufl, no 
doubt, contribute to the improvement of the 
tafte of the inhabitants, both in arts and fcience. 

Tafle, which is in other words, the faculty of 
difcerning and relifhing beauty, is acquired by 
the comparifon of beautiful objects with one ano- 
ther, and, upon that account, is likely to be 
found in greater perfection, where thofe objects 
abound the mod, and where, of courfe, fuch com- 
parifons would be the mod obvious and eafy. 
Hence fprings, in a good meafure, I apprehend, 
the elegant and varied fancy of the eaftern peo* 

T a pie, 



2 7 6 Dr. Falconer on the Influence of the Scenery 

pie, exemplified in fome of their works of art, 
particularly the patterns of their manufactures. 
The diverfified beauty of the vegetables, that 
cover the ground in thofe countries, could 
fcarcely fail to fuggeft ideas, far fuperior to 
what could be imagined by thofe, who never had 
any opportunity of feeing fuch delicate produc- 
tions. 

The moft admired paffages in the eaftern wri- 
tings, efpecially the poetical, owe much of their 
power and effect, to the painting of the natural 
beauties of the country and climate. A late 
writer,* of no inconfiderable tafte, as well as talent 
for obfervation, has remarked of the Spaniards, 
that the fimilies ufed by them, are univerfally 
taken from the beautiful objects of nature con- 
tinually before their eyes. " The fragrance of 
the rofe, the odour of the orange, the perfume 
of the myrtle, the murmuring of the cave in- 
viting to (lumber, the height of the mountains, 
the fteepnefs of the rocks, the fplendour of the 
rifing fun, the coolnefs of the evening breeze, 
and the brilliancy of the ftars by night, afford 
them endlefs allegories." Even Homer himfelf, 
that great mafter of our paffions, is not a little 
indebted to his familiar acquaintance with the 
fcenery of a beautiful country, for the ravifhing 

• Carter's Travels from Gibraltar to Malaga. 

effects 



of a Country on its Inhabitants. 277 

effects of many of his defcriptions and compa- 

rifons.* 

Milton appears to have been fo fenfible of this 

effect of Homer's pi&urefque reprefentations, 

that he has ventured, perhaps improperly, to 



* Glad earth perceives, and from her bofom pours 
Unbidden herbs, and voluntary flowers : 
Thick new-born violets a foft carpet fpread, 
And clultring lotos fwell'd the rifing bed; 
And fudden hyacinths the turf beltrow, 
And flamy crocus made the mountain glow : 
Celeftial dews defcending o'er the ground, 
Perfume the mount, and breathe ambrofia round. 

Pope's Homer Iliad. B. XIV. L. 395. 

Next this, the eye the art of Vulcan leads 
Deep thro' fair fore its and a length of meads, 
And flails, and folds, andfeatter'd cots between, 
And fleecy flocks, that whiten all the fcene. 

Homer's Iliad. Defer, of Achilles's Shield. 

Elyflum fhall be thine, the blifsful plains 
Of utmoft earth, where R.adamanthus reigns : 
Joys ever young unmix'd, with pain or fear, 
Fill the wide circle of the eternal year : 
Stern winter fmiles on that aufpicious clime ; 
The fields are florid with unfading prime; 
From the bleak pole no winds inclement blow* 
Mould round the hail, or fliake the fleecy fnow ; 
Put from the breezy deep, the bleft inhale 
The fragrant murmurs of the weftern gale, 

Homer's OdyfT. B. IV. 

T 1 adorn 



278 Dr. Falconer on the Influence of the Scenery 

adorn a fcene laid in Britain, with productions 
peculiar to Afiatic climes.* 

A beautiful fcenery of a country contributes, 
1 apprehend, to influence the fentiments of the 
people in fome points refpedting Religion. Thus, 
it is more than probable, that many of the ideas 
in the Roman and Greek mythologies, concern- 
ing a future (late of happinefs, were derived 
from this fource. Homer's defcription of the 
Elyfian fields, f and of the dwelling of the 
Gods, J is evidently borrowed from what he 

• May thy lofty head be crown'd 

With many a tower and terras round, 
And here and there thy banks upon 
With groves of myrrh and cinnamon. 

Milton's Comus, 
f See lafi. page, Note * 
J Without the grot, a various fylvan fcene 
Appear'd around, and groves of living green, 
Poplars and alders ever quivering play'd, 
And nodding cyprefs form'd a fragant made, 
On whofe high branches waving with the ftorm, 
The birds of broadeft wing their manfion form ; 
The chough, the fea-mew, the loquacious crow, 
And fcream aloft, and fkim the deeps below : 
Depending vines the fhelving cavern fcreen, 
With purple clutters blufhing thro' the green ; 
Four limpid fountains from the clefts diftil, 
And every fountain pours a different rill, 
In mazy windings wandering down the hill, 
Where blooming meads with vivid greens were crown'd, 
And glowing violets threw odours round ; 
A fcene, where, if a God fhou'd caft his fight, 
A God might gaze and wander with delight. 

had 



\ 



of a Country on its Inhabitants. 27 9 

had feen in a fine country : and Virgil,* and 
Tibullus, t frem to have taken their defcriptions 
of the fituation of the happy in a future life, 
from thofe natural beauties, with which they were 
familiar. 

The fame circumstances appear to have in- 
fluenced the general opinions, concerning a place 
of future punifhment. As the refidence of the 
blefr. was fuppofed to be in a country exquifitely 
adorned with natural beauties, fo that of the 



* Devenere locos Isetos, et amoena vireta, 
Fortunatorum nemorum, fedefque beatas : 
Largior hie campos ^Ether, etlumine reftit 
Purpureo, Solemque fuum fua fidera norunt. 

Virg ^Eneid. Lib. VI. 
¦f Sed me, quod facih's tenero fum Temper amori, 
Ipfa Venus campos ducet in Elyfios. 
HiC cheras cantufque vigent, paffimque vagantes 
Duke ionant tenui guttirre carmen aves. 
Fert cafiam non culca feges, totofque per agros 
Floret odoratis terra benigna rofis. 

Tibutt. Eleg. Lib. I. El. 4. 
Propertius fpcaks of Elyfian rofes. 
Mulcet ubi Elyfias aura beata rofas. 

Prop. Lib. IV. EJ. 7. L. 60. 
Milton ufes nearly the fameexpreffion ; 
On a bed 
Of heapt Elyfian flowers. 

Milton Allepro. L. 1 46, 147. 

Pvolls o'er Elyfian flowers her amber ftream. 

Par. Loft. HI. 359. 

T 4 referable 



280 Br. Falconer on the Influence of the Scenery 

miferable was placed in a region,* dark and 
uncultivated, foul and horrible, in which cir- 
cumftances, the mifery of thofe condemned to 
inhabit it was thought, in a good meafure, to 
confift. Such are the effe&s we fuppofe pro- 
ducible by the beautiful face of a country. 

Let us now fee what would be the effefb of 
one of a different appearance. 

Hippocrates obferves, t that the inhabitants 
of rough, mountainous, and uncultivated coun- 



* Low in the dark Tartarean gulf fhall groan. 

Iliad. VIII. L. 16. 
No fun e'er gilds the gloomy horrors there, 
No chearful gales refrelh the lazy air. 

Iliad. VIII. 601 et. 
At fcelerata fedes jacet in nodle profunda 
Abdita, quam circum flumina nigra fonant. 

Tibull. I. El. 4. 

..._. turn Tartarus ipfe 

Bis patetin prasceps tantum, tenditque fub umbras, 
Quantus ad sethereum cceli fufpectus Olympum. 

Virg. ./En. Lib. VI. 
- - - - diverfo itinere malos a bonis loca tetra, inculta, 
fxda atajue formidolofa habere. 

Salluft. Bell. Catilinar, 

Efle inferos Stoicus Zenon docuit et fedes prorfum ab 

impiis effe difcretas et illos quidem quietas et deleftabiles 

incolere regiones, hos vero luere psenas in tenebrofis locis, 

atque in caeni voraginibus horrendis. 

Lattantii. Lib. VIII. C. 7. 

•J- De Aerib. aquis et locis. Cap. LV. 

tries, 



of a Country on its Inhabitant* 2$t 

tries, are rude and ferocious in their difpofition 
and manners. The people of Cynetha in 
Arcadia, who lived in a fituation particularly* 
gloomy and difagreeable, were fo remarkable 
for their unfociable qualities, that they were 
expelled from the Grecian cities. The Cim- 
merians, who inhabited a country dark and 
melancholy, fubfifted upon robbery and plunder: 
and the country of the Cyclops, according to 
Homer's defcription, was fomewhat of a fimilar 
appearance. The fame difpofition, of the peo- 
ple inhabiting the fame region, is mentioned 
by Fazellus, a writer concerning Sicily, about 
two hundred years ago, and confirmed, by the 
later teftimony of Mr. Brydone. The Indians 
alfo, difcovered a few years fince by Mr. Byron, 
in the Southern Hemifphere, were brutal and 
favage to an enormous excefs. 

May we not here fuppofe, with an elegant 
writer, that a ftormy fea, together with a frozen, 
barren and inhofpitable fhore, might work upon 
the imagination of thefe Indians, fo as, by banifh- 
ing all pleafing and benign ideas, to fill them 
with habitual gloom, and with a propenfity f 
to cruelty ? And might not the tremendous 
fcenes of Etna have had a like effect upon the 

* Athensi. Lib. XIV. Polybii. Lib. IV. C. 3. 
f Harris's Philolog. Enquiries, p. 518. 

Cyclops, 



282 Dr. Falconer on the Influence of the Scenery 

Cyclops, who lived among fmoke, thunderings, 
eruptions of fire, and earthquakes ? * 

If then, thefe limited regions fo influenced 
their natives, may not a fimilar effect be pre- 
fomed from the vaft regions of the north ; may 
not its cold, barren, and uncomfortable climate, 
have made its numerous tribes equally rude and 
favage ? Ovid, the Roman poet, who, unfortu- 
nately for himfelf, had but too many opportu- 
nities for obfervations of this kind, feems to 
have been of this opinion, from his fo frequently 
connecting his account of the country with the 
manners of the inhabitants. Is it not probable, 
that the dreary afpect of the country, might be 
one caufe of the devaluations committed by 
thefe people, in their invafions of the Roman 

* Frigida me cohibent Euxlni littora Ponti : 
Diftus ab antiquis Axenus ille fait. 
Nam neque ja&antur moderatis aequora ventis, 
Nee placidos portus hofpita navis adit. 
Sunt circa gentes, quae prasdam fanguine quaeranr, 
Nee minus infida terra timetur aqua. 
Illi, quos audis, hominum gaudere craore, 
Paene fub ejufdem fideiis axe jacent 

Ovid. Trift. L. IV. EI. 4. 

Sive locum fpe&o, locus eft inamabilis, et qua 
Effe nihil toto triftius orbe poteft. 
Sive homines ; vix funt homines, hoc nomine digni : 
Quamque lupi fasvas plus feritatis habent. 

Ovid. Trift. L. V. Eleg, 7. 



empire? 



of a Country on its Inhabitants 283 

empire ? * A defolate and uncultivated fcene, 
which probably originally infpired the ferocious 
difpofuion of thefe people, was more congenial 
to their ideas and inclinations, than elegant 
buildings, and cultivated grounds, which, whilft 
they betrayed the unwarlike fpirit of their pof- 
feflbrs, evidenced their fuperiority in underftand- 
ing and induftry. 

Miners, for the fame reafons, are generally 
obferved to be a hardy, ferocious, and cruel fee 
of men. The fcenes of horror, mifery, and 
gloom, with which they are converfant, oblite- 
rate the finer fenfations, and fteel the heart againfl: 
the fentiments of tendernefs and companion- The 

* Ovid mentions in his time, that the Gets deftroyed all 
the buildings, and laid the country wafte, wherever they 

went. 

Hoftis equo pollens, longeque volante fagitta 
Vicinam late depopulatur humum. 
Qux nequeunt fecum ferre aut abducere, perdunt, 
Et cremat infontes hoftica flamnia cafas. 

OwVTrift. L. IH. Eleg. 10. 
Qiiicquid invenire poterat momento temporis parvi, vaf- 
tabant, (Saraceni) milvorum rapacium fimiles. 

Amm Marcell. L. XIX. C. 4. 

The Franks deftroyed forty cities upon the Rhine. 

Zofim L. III. C. 1. 

Alaric deflroyed all the cities in Macedonia, Thrace and 
Greece, except Athens, and Thebes. Attila preferred 
his houfe of wood on the Tibifcus, to all the fplendid 
palaces he might have enjoyed. Zofim. L. V. C. 5. 

emotions 



*$4 Dr. Falconer on the Influence of the Scenery 

emotions of the mind, in thefe inftances, cor- 
refpond with the wildnefs and ferocity of the 
furrounding chaos of objects, and require in 
order to humanize them, a certain degree of ad- 
justment, and even embellifhment, of external 
appearances. We might reafonably conclude 
from hence, that a people fofuuated, would have 
their intellectual faculties confiderably contract- 
ed, or depreficd. The paucity of objects, and 
thofe of a difgufting, or terrible nature, would 
afford few motives for inquiry, and, of courfe, 
a narrow field for mental exertion. 

The ancient Germans,* to whom letters were 
unknown, and who feem to have pofTefied very 
little third: after knowledge, dwelt in a region, 
dark with forefts, and foul with marines ; and 
the defolate and uncultivated face of the country 
contributes, I doubt not, to encourage the igno- 
rance of the American Indians. We might, 
with dill greater probability imagine, that fuch 
a people would be particularly defective in all 
matters that regard tafte and fentiment. This, 
however, is not altogether the cafe* Their ideas 
are indeed melancholy, and their views of nature 
dark and gloomy; but, neverthelefs, often par- 

*¦ Terra etfi aliquanto fpecie differt, ell in univerfum, 
aut fylvis horrida aut paludibus fseda. 

Taciti Germania. 

Multis montibus afpera, et mana ex parte Mvis ct 
paludibus invia. Pompon. Mela. 

take 



of a Country on its Inhabitants. 285 ' 

-take of a dreary magnificence, and fullen gran- 
deur, that produce a deep and la.fr.ing imprefllon 
upon the mind. Thefe fentiments are congenial 
with the appearance of the country The ftu- 
pendous fcenery of rocks, clouds, precipices, 
torrents, and deferts, continually exhibited to 
their fenfes, cannot fail to fuggeft a train of 
thoughts and expreffions correfponding there- 
with ; and the accidents, to which a life of hunt- 
ing, in a country that gives occafions to fo many 
dangers, is expofed, contribute (Till farther to 
increafe the gloom, and throw a darker fhadc 
upon the imagination. Hence, forrow and terror 
are the paffions they are mod naturally led to ex- 
cite. Their mufic, as well as their poetry, is 
plaintive, and, I believe, moflly applied to the 
recital of melancholy tales, or unfortunate events., 
Even their fuperftitions are of a melancholy caft. 
The noted faculty of prying into futurity, by 
means of a previous fight of events that were 
to take place, fo noted in tire Alpine fcenes, 
both of Scotland and Swifferland, is held to 
be of a fad and uncomfortable nature, unlike the 
Seers of old, "who were thought to be. particularly 
favoured by fuch communications. This faculty 
has been regarded by thofe, wlio believed they 
pofleflcd it, as a misfortune, on account of the 
many dreadful images it obtruded upon the 
fancy. This kind of prefcience Teems to have 
been principally, though not altogether, con- 
cerned 



286 Dr. Falctner on the Influence, &c. 

cerned in fcenes of horror. Deaths, fhipwrecks, 
ftorms, and famine, were much more frequently 
predicted, than the chearful and exhilerating 
circumftances of life ; which forms no incon- 
fiderable prefumption, that the ideas that oc- 
cupied their minds, were principally of a gloomy 
and melancholy afpect. 

The notions of people, concerning a future 
(rate, appear to be much influenced by the 
fcenery of fuch a country. Some nations have 
been fo fenfible of the difadvantages and incon- 
veniences attending it, that they have formed 
their fyftem of future happinefs, apart from any 
connection with the appearance of the country. 
Thus the Scythians, and the northern nations 
of Europe, held their Elyfium to confift, in the 
joys of wine, and of company collected in a fpa- 
cious building. The American Indians, for 
(imilar reafons, have (elected fuch circumftances 
only, as ferved mod to temper the gloomy and 
fevere appearance of nature. Thus, they expect to 
be tranflated to a country, where the fky is always 
clear and unclouded, and a perpetual fpring 
prevails. On the contrary, when they mean to 
defcribe a place of future torment, they figure it 
as pofifeffing all the dreary appendages belonging 
to their own country, but in a greater degree. 
Thus the Ifurin, or hell of the northern nations, 
was fuppofed to be a place dark, gloomy, cold, 
and deftitute of every convenience of life ; the 

former 



Dr. Per rival's Tribute to the, &c. 287 

former of which circumftances, as well as the 

latter, were imagined to conftitute the mifery 
inflicted by it. 



A Tribute to the Memory of Charles de 
Polier, Efq. By Thomas Percival, M. D. 
Read November 13, 1782.* 

THE contemplation of moral and intellectual 
excellence affords the molt pleafing and 
inftruclive exercife, to a well conftituted mind. 
By exalting our ideas of the human character, 

October 30th, 1782. t 
* At a meeting of the Literary and Philofophical Society of 
Nanchejler, the following relblution patted unanimoufly. 

" The Members of the Literary and Philofophical Society 
lamenting, with heartfelt concern, the death of their late 
much honoured brother, Charles de Polier, Efq ; unani- 
moufly refolve, that Dr. Perci-val be requeued to draw 
up a grateful and refpe&ful Tribute to his Memory; to 
be inferted in the journals of the Society, with a view 
to record his diftinguiihed merit, and to prolong the in- 
fluence of his bright example." 

November 13th, 1782- 
At a meeting of the Literary and Philofophical Society it 
was refolved unanimoufly, That the Thanks of the 
Society be returned to Dr Perdval, for his Tribute to 
the Memory of Charles de Polier t Efq ; and that he be 
defired to print the fame." 

it 



288 Dr. Per aval's Tribute to the Memory 

it expands and heightens the principle of bene- 
-volence ; and at the fame time is favourable to 
piety, by raifing our views to. the fupreme 
Author of all that is fair and good in man. 
The wife and the virtuous have ever dwelt, 
with delight, on the meritorious talents and 
difpofitions of their fellow-creatures : And an 
amiable philofopher drew, from this fource, fuch 
fweet confolations, under the toils and diftreffes 
of life, that he warmly recommends the practice 
to our imitation, " When you would recreate your- 
"Jelf" fays M. Antoninus, " reflecl on the lauda- 
" ble qualities of your acquaintance : On the magna- 
" nimity of one, the modefty of another, or the libera- 
** lity of a third." * Generous meditation! which 
everyone, prefent, may indulge; and, by indulg- 
ing, afiimilate, to his own nature, the various 
perfections of others ; transfufing, as it were, into 
his bread, the virtues which he contemplates. 

But can we engage ourfelves in fuch an e-xer- 
cife, without the mod lively recollection of our 
late honoured and beloved colleague ? His 
image prefents itfelf before us j and we inftantly 
recognifc, the agreeablenefs of his form, the 
animation of his countenance, the vigour of his 
¦underftanding, and the goodnefs of his heart. 
How graceful was his addrefs ; how fprightly, 
entertaining, and intelligent his converfation ! ¦ 

* M. Antonin. Lib. VI. 

What 



of Charles de Toller, 2-89 

What rich (lores of knowledge did he difplay ; 
what facility in the ufe, what judgment in the 
application of them ! Few have been the fubjects 
of difcuffion in this Society, which his obferva- 
tions have not enlightened: and what he could 
not himfelf elucidate, he has enabled others to 
do, by the pertinency of his queries, and the 
fagacity of his conjectures. So quick was his 
penetration j fo enlarged his comprehenfion ; fo 
exact the arrangement of his intellectual trea- 
fures ! Learning, with fome, is the parent of 
mental obfcurity ; and the multiplicity of ideas, 
which have been acquired by fevere ftudy, ferves 
only to produce perpltxity and confufion. But 
Mr. de Poller's thoughts were always ready at 
command. And he engaged with perfpicuity, 
on every topic of difcourfe ; becaufe he faw, at. 
one view, all its relations and analogies to. 
thofe branches of, knowledge, with which he 
was already acquainted. With fuch felicity of 
genius, he was continually making large ac- 
ceflions to his (lock of faience, without laborious 
refearches, or feclufion from the focial enjoy- 
ments of life. 

Of his abilities as a writer, he furnifhed us 
with a (Iriking proof, in the Differtation he 
delivered, Lift winter ; which is equally diftin- 
gui(hed by the juflnefs of its fentiments, and the 
purity of ifs diction 5 and fully ciifplays his per- 

Vol.'I. U ftdfc 



290 D?. Per rival's Tribute to the Memory 

fed attainment, both of the idiom and embelliih- 
ments of the Englilh language. 

But Mr- de Polier had merits, more eftimable 
than thofe, which he derived from the vivacity 
of his fancy, the elegance of his tafte, or the 
powers of his understanding. And his friends 
will cordially unite with me in teftifying, that, 
if honoured for his intellectual, he was beloved 
for his moral endowments. His heart was open 
to every generous fympathy; and the fenfibility 
of his nature fo enlivened all his perceptions, 
that the ordinary duties of focial intercourfe 
were performed, by him, with a warmth, almoft 
equal to that of friendihip. Nor was this the 
artificial deportment of unmeaning courtefy » 
but the generous effufion of a heart, which felt 
for all mankind. In fuch philanthropy, polite- 
nefs has its true foundation : and of this joint 
grace of nature and education, fC which aids 
and Strengthens Virtue, where it meets her, and 
imitates her adtions, where flie is not," our la- 
mented brother was a bright example. So 
engaging were his manners, and at the fame 
time fo fincere his difpofition, that we may 
apply to him, wrh honour, what Cicero meant 
as a reproach; that he was qualified, cum trijlibus 
fever e, cum remiffis jucunde, cumjenibus graviter, cum 
juventute comiter vivere. Thefe powers of plea- 
fing flowed from no fervile compliances, nor 

ever 



cf Charles de Polier. 491 

ever led him into criminal indulgences. As a 
companion, he was convivial without intempe- 
rance, and gay without levity or licentioufnefs. 
His converfation was fprightly and unreferved ; 
but, in the mod unguarded hours of mirth, 
exempt from all indecency and profanenefs. 
And the fallies of his wit and pleafantry were fo 
feafoned with good humour, that they gave de- 
light, unmixed with pain, even to thofe who 
were the object's of them. If the coarfer plea- 
fures of the bottle be banifhed from our tables ; 
or if rational converfation, and delicacy of 
behaviour, with the fweet fociety of the fofter 
fex, be now fubftituted in their room, this happy 
revolution has been rendered more complete by 
the influence of Mr. de Polier. 

But though urbanity, according to the moll 
liberal interpretation of that term, was the 
charafteriftic of our excellent colleague, he pof- 
fefled other endowments, of more intrinfic value. 
And I could enlarge, with pleafure, on his nice 
fenfe of rectitude, his inviolable integrity, and 
facred regard to truth. Thefe moral virtues 
were, in him, founded on no fictitious principle 
of honour, but refulted from the conftitution of 
his mind; and were ftrengthened by habit, regu- 
lated by reafon, and fanctioned by religion* 
For, notwithstanding the veil which he chofe 
to caft over his piety, it was manifeft to his inti- 
mate friends; and may be recollecled by others, 

U 2 who 



292 •£>>"• Per aval's 'Tribute to the Memory 

who have marked the ferioufnefs, with which 
he difcourfed, on every fubject relative to the 
being and attributes of God. Defe&ive indeed 
muft be the character of that man, who can 
difcern and acknowledge, without venerating, 
the divine perfections ; and partake of the 
bounties of nature, yet feel no emotions of 
Gratitude towards its benevolent Author. " A 
** little philosophy, " fays lord Verulam, <c may incline 
" the mind to atheijm ; but depth in philofophy will 
" bring it about again to religion."* 

I have thus attempted to draw a rude fketch 
of the features, of our late honoured friend. A 
fuller delineation might furnifh a more pleafing 
picture to ftrangers ; but, to the Members of 
this Societv, a few outlines will fuffice to revive 
the image of the beloved original. This image, 
I truft, will be long and forcibly imprefTed on 
our minds; and that every one, now prefent, 
may adopt the language of Tacitus, on a fimilar 
occafion. " Quicquid ex Agricola amavimus, quic~ 
<c quid mirati/uihus, manet, manfurumque eft in animis 

* The noble author fubjoins ajuft reafon, for this ob- 
fervation. *.* For while the mind of man," fays he^ 
" looketh upon fecond caufes fcattered,- it may fometimes 
" reft in them, and go no farther: but when it beholdeth 
" the chain of them linked together, it muft needs fly to 
* Providence and Deity." 

Bacon's EfTay on Atheifm. 



k 



hominum." 



of Charles de Polier. 293 

* c hominum." *« Whatever in Agricola was the 
M object of our love and of our admiration, 
ft remains, and will remain, in the hearts of 
" all who knew him." 

Having taken a fhort view of the character 
of Mr. de Polier, curiofity and attachment con- 
cur in prompting us, to extend the retrofpect; 
and we become folicitous to know fomethino- of 
his connections and education; and to trace the 
leading events of a life, in the conclufion of 
which we have been fo deeply interefted. But 
our friend was no egotift; and the zeal with 
which he entered into the concerns of others, 
precluded the detail of his own. I mud con- 
tent, myfelf, therefore, with prefenting to the 
Society, the following brief memoirs. 

Charles de Polier Bottens was the fun of the 

Reverend de Polier Bottens, Dean of the 

Cathedral Church of Laufanne, Prefident of the 
Synod of the Pais de Vaud, Member of the 
Society of Arts and Sciences at Manheim, and 
Citizen of Geneva. He was born at Laufanne, 
in the year 1753; and received the firft part of 
his education, in the public fchools of that 
city. As foon as he had acquired a fufficient 
knowledge of the daffies, he was fent to an 
academy near CafTel, in Germany ; from whence 
after a refidence of two years, he was removed* 
to the univerfiry of Gottingen. In this cele- 
brated feat of learning, he pafled three years •, 

U 3 and 



294 Dr. Vertical's tribute to the Memory 

and being then inclined to a military life, he 
obtained a lieutenant's commifiion in the Swifs 
regiment of D'Erlaft, in the French fervice. 
But he foon refigned his commifiion, and re- 
turned to Laufanne ; where he had a command 
given him, in one of the Provincial regiments 
of dragoons. In this fituation, his connection 
commenced with the Earl of Tyrone ; who 
offered him the tuition of his eldefb fon, Lord 
le Poer, on terms equally honourable and ad- 
vantageous. But before the engagement was 
completed, propofals were made to him by the 
duke of Saxe Gotha, to become governor to the 
hereditary prince, with an annuity, for life, of 
twelve hundred, rixdollars ; an apartment at 
court; and the poft of chamberlain, or rank of 
colonel. Thefe propofals, however, he declined 
in favour of lord Tyrone. And he executed 
the important truft, afligned to him, with fuch 
judgment, tendernefs, and fidelity, as induced 
that refpe&able nobleman to commit three of his 
children to his fole direction. Thefe amiable 
youths he brought to England, in the fummer 
of 1779; and fettled them at the fchool of a 
clergyman in Manchefter, who is eminently dif_ 
tinguifhed by his virtues as a man, and abilities 
as a teacher. 

At this period, our firft acquaintance with Mr. 
de Polier was formed. By the laws of hofpita- 
lity, he was entitled to our attention, as a 

ftranger; 



of Charles de Toller. 295 

ftranger : but his perfonal accomplifhments, 
and the charms of his converfation, foon fuper- 
feded the ordinary claims of cuftom, and con- 
verted formal civility into efteem and friendfhip. 
He became our companion in pleafure ; our 
afliftant in ftudy ¦, our counfellor in difficulty ; and 
our folace in diftrefs. Amufement acquired a 
dignity and zeft, by his participation ; and he 
foftened the' aufterity of philofophy, whenever 
hejoined in the purfuit. The inftitution, which 
now celebrates his memory, owes to him much 
of its popularity and fuccefs ; and, fo long as it 
fubfifts, his name will be revered, as one of its 
founders, and mod fhining ornaments. 

About the middle of laft winter he was 
attacked by a complaint, which at firft gave no 
difturbance to the vital functions. But being 
aggravated by the fatigues of a long journey to 
Holyhead, and of a voyage from thence to 
Dublin, at a time when he laboured under the 
Influenza, his malady rapidly increafed after his 
arrival in Ireland ; and put a final period to his 
valuable life on the 18th of October 1782.* The 
vigour of his faculties, and the warmth of his 
affections, continued even to the hour of his 
diffolution. And the amiablenefs of his beha- 
viour, in the clofing fcene of trial and fuffering 

• At Curraghmore, near Waterford, the feat of 
the Earl of Tyrone. 

U 4 through. 



296 Dr. Per aval's 'Tribute to the Memory, &c, 

through which he paffed, gave fuch completion 
to his character, that we may apply to him, what 
the Poet has faid of Mr. Add i Ion ; 

He taught us how to live ; and, oh ! too high 

The price of knowledge, taught us how to die, * 

On this affecting event, I cannot exprefs your 
feelings and my own, in terms fo forcible as thofe 
of the animated hiftorian, whom I have before 
quoted. Si quis piorum manibus locus ; ft, utjapien- 
tibus placet, non cum corpote exftinguuntur magna 
anim<e •, placide quiefcas, noj'que ab infirmo defiderio* 
ad contemplationerii vi tutum tuarum voces, quas 
neque lugeri, neque plangi fas eft ! Admiratione te 
potius temporalibus laudibus, et fi natura Juppeditet, 
militum decoramus I \ " If there be any habita- 
« f tion for the fhades of the virtuous; if, as 
<c philofophers fuppofe, exalted fouls do not 
" perifh with the body; may you repofe in peace, 
" and recall us from vain regret, to the contem- 
,( plation of your virtues, which allow no place 
V for mourning or complaint! Let us adorn 
<c your memory, rather, by a fixed admiration, 
« c and, if our natures will permit, by an imitation 
<* of your excellent qualities, than by temporary 

eulogies !" % 

* TickelPs Poem on the Death of Addifon. 

f Tacit. Vit. Agricolae. 

\ See Dr. Aikin's Translation of the Life of Agricola. 

Thoughts 



<c 



Br. Falconer on the Style and Tafte, &c. 297 



Thoughts on the Style and Taste of Garden- 
ing among the Ancients. By William 
Falcomer, M. D. F. R S, &c. Communicated 
by Br. FerchaL Read December 11, 17^2. 

/ "T" A HE mpft early account we have of a Gar- 
-*• den, is contained in the Sacred Writings, 
in the defeription of the habitation of our rirft 
parents- The form, difpofition, and arrange- 
ment are not particularly defcribed. It is only 
faid, to have contained every tree, " that is 
pleafant to the eye, and good for food;"* and 
that it was watered by a river, which, no doubt, 
added to the beauty of the profpect, (which, in 
the exprefllon before cited, feems to have been 
particularly confulted,) as well as to the fertility 
of the foil- Wood and water, therefore, both 
for (hade j- and ornament, the principal points 
aimed at in modern gardens, may be prefumed 
to have been here in the higheft perfection, 
farther than this, we are not informed. 

The next hints concerning Gardens, that I can 

* Genefis, Chap. ii. ver. 9. 

• f And Ac'am and his wife hid them felves from the pre- 
fence of the Lord, aiaong the trees of the Garden. 

Geneiis, Chap. iii. ver. 8. 

difcover 



298 Dr Falconer on (he Style and Tajle 

difcover in the Sacred Writings, are to be found in 
the Song of Solomon, part of the fcene of which 
is, undoubtedly, laid in a garden- * Flowers 
and fruits are particularly fpoken of, as the 
ornaments, and the produce of it ; and befides 
thefe, aromatic vegetables t formed a confider- 
able part of the gratifications it afforded. 
Fountains, and dreams of water appear, alfo, to 
have had a fhare in the compofition, and, pro- 
bably, for ornament, as well as ufe. Statues, 
or paintings are not mentioned in thefe defcrip- 

* I am the rofe of Sharon, and the lily of the vallies. 

Chap. ii. ver. 1. 

A garden inclofed, is my filter, my fpoufe ; a fpring 
Jhut up, a fountain fealed. Thy plants are an orchard of 
pomegranates, with pleafant fruits, camphire, with fpike- 
nard, fpikenard and faffrcn, calamus and cinnamon, 
with all trees of frankincenfe, myrrh, and aloes, with all 
the chief fpices. A fountain of gardens, a well of living 
waters, and ftreams from Lebanon. Awake, O north wind, 
and retire thou fouth, blow upon my garden, that the 
fpices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved come into 
his garden, and eat his pleafant fruits. 

Chap. iv. ver. 12. et. 

f Aromatic plants are very often mentioned as a high 
gratification, and perfumes, to this day, are much admired 
in the eaft. " His cheeks, are a bed of fpice , with fweet 
flowers, his lips like lilies, dropping fweet fmelling 
myrrh." Ch. v ver. 13. "I will get me to the mountain 
pf myrrh, and to the hill of frankincenfe." 

Ch. iv. ver. 6. 

tions, 



of gardening among the Ancients. 299 

tions, and, probably, had no place among their 
embellifliments. 

It is proper to remark, that all the beauties of 
thefe gardens were confined within themfelves. 
No beauty of profpect, or variety of ground is 
mentioned, and for obvious reafons. The pri- 
vacy of a place, deftined, in a great meafure, 
for the confinement of women, prevented the 
former, and the limited bounds of the extent of 
the garden, would not admit of the latter. 

It appears probable, that, at that time, they 
were ufed to have houfes in their gardens, 
wherein, particularly in hot weather, they were 
accuflomed to fleep at nights, which probably, 
was a great part of the gratification refulting 
from them. A dwelling is mentioned in the 
Song of Solomon, that feems to have flood in 
the garden, and was probably of this kind ;* and 
it is likely, that "the pleafant houfes," men- 
tioned by Ezekiel, f were of a fimilar nature. 

I am inclined to think, that fome ever-green 
trees, particularly fome of the tcrebinthinate 



* Chap. v. ver. 1, &C. 

f Chap. xxvi. ver. 12. 

Dr. Ruffel fays, that it is cuftomary for the principal 

perfons at Aleppo to live at their gardens during the month 

of April, and part of May. They live under tents, and 

perhaps tents might be ufed in the inftance cited. 

Ruflel's Aleppo, p. 135. 
kind, 



300 Dr. Falconer on the Style and Tafte 

kind, were favourite ornaments of the Jewilh 
gardens. 

The cedar is often mentioned, as a tree highly 
ornamental ; and both that and the fir are fpo- 
ken of in the book of the prophet Ezekiel, * as 
being frequent in magnificent gardens. Dr. 
RufTel t likewife mentions, that, at prefent, at 
Aleppo a cyprefs tree is generally planted in 
the little gardens, in the inner courts of the 
houfes, as well as in their more extenfive ones. 

The next defcription of a garden, in order of 
time, appears to be that of Alcinous by Homer, 
This has been, generally, efteemed to be a fruit 
garden for ufe merely, without any view to orna- 
ment. But, I do not take this to be altogether 
its character, though it feems to be fo in a good 
meafure. Something of parterre, % planted with 

flowers, 

* The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him, 
the fir trees were not like his boughs. Ezekiel. xxxi. 
f RuiTel's Aleppo, p. 5. 
J E»9a o£ xo^/xvjTai -srcatriai irapx nicnav ayyji'i 
IlavToia , m(pva.ff:v mwrxvo* yxtauacc\. 

Homeri Iliad. L. VIL 

Athensus, and the Scholiafr. on Homer, underiland pot 

herbs only to be meant in this place ; but the words *.w\t.ytci\ 

and yaioBtra* feems too ornament.tl to be fo underltood, 

and to be rather applicable to flowers. At any rate, they 

were planned in parterre-like divifion, as the word vf»mec.\ 

fig-nines. 
h "Ad 



df gardening among the Ancients. 30 1 

flowers, appears to have compofed a part of it ; 
and, probably, Homer would not have beftowed 
fo particular, and laboured a defcription upon 
the trees, if they had not contributed to the 
beauty of its appearance, as well as to the fur- 
nifhing of the table with fruits. 

The hanging gardens of Babylon come next, 
I believe, in order of time. Thefe feem, in 
many refpecls, to have been laid out with good 
tafte. Their elevation, not only produced a 
variety and extent of view, but was, alfo, ufeful 
in moderating the heat, which, I fuppofe, might 
be the principal reafon, why fuch a construction 
was fixed upon; though, another is afllgned, 
referring only to the fimilarity of appearance. 
Such a fituation would, likewife, fuit a greater 
variety of trees, and plants, than a plain furface, 
and would contain a larger, as well as a more 
diverfified extent. 

The fuiting of the fituation, to the nature of 
the trees, feems, from the account given by 



" Ad olerum confitionem quadrats difpofitiones quae 
»<K(«u dicuntur in laterculi formam" Columella. 

0$ t« a-Ai;C;a— Scholiail. on Homer, 

Was this divifion of the garden of Alcinous, fimilar to 
the garden of herbs, mentioned in the Book of Kings, into 
which Ahab wiftied to convert Xaboth's vineyard ? 



Jofephus, 



302 Dr. Falconer en the Style and Tajle 

Jofephus, to have been one view,* in the 
eredting the building in fuch a manner. And 
the fuccefs feems to have been anfwerable, as the 
trees are faid to have flourifhed extremely well, f 
and to have grown as tall as in their native 
fituations. On the whole then, however dif- 
ferent thefe may appear from modern gardens, 
I mud confefs, I think they were formed with 
judgment and tafte, and well adapted to the 
fituation and circumftances. 

It appears, from the nature of the ftruclure, 
that the trees, here, mould be planted regularly, 
in rows and ranks j but this was alfo in the 
Perfian tafte. The garden of the younger Cyrus 
at Sardis, which was all planted with his own 



* - - - tv ee rot? £a<n?vEK>i? toutoij a.vx'Krjj/.fx.a.rx Xi5ua v^-/>\a 
ctvux.oSof/.ri<T»<; *a» rri» q^/iv carooovs o/xomTaTV)! 1 toij op£<7( kxtxQu- 

.laAojAtvoc y.fFfA.x<7Tov TrapaoWov 

Jofeph. contra Aplonem, L. I. § 19. Extr. 



-J- To 01 tox$o{ ei;aiAx\nriJi.itov wXiipj v>v travroaxTruv #tvdcui> ruv 
MiXjASvui) xxt* re TO //.eytQai; kxi rr,v cthXyv X a [ tv ToJ 5 Seo^e^oij 
¦^v^xyioyriffxi. Diod. L. II, 

Stipites carum otto cubitorum fpatium craflitudine 
sequent: inquinquaginta pedum ahitudinem emineant, et 
frugiferse seque funt, ac fi terra fua alerentur. 



Quint. Curt.L. V. 

hands, 



of gardening among the Ancients. 303 

hands, was laid out in ftraight lines, * and, at 
right angles, which was, no doubt, efteemed 
the eftablifhed cuftom, of placing the trees in 
gardens. 

It does not, as far as I can find, appear clearly, 
that flowers made a part of the ornaments of 
thefe gardens j but, we may conjecture, they 
did, from the odours mentioned to be exhaled 
from the plants growing there, j - which were 
underftood to conftitute no fmall part of the 
pleafure they afforded. 

It feems probable, from feveral circumftances, 
that the eaftern gardens were adjoining to the 
houfe or palace, to which they belonged. Thus, 
King Ahafuerus goes immediately, from the 
banquet of wine, to walk in the garden of the 
palace. % The garden of Cyrus, at Sardis, 
mentioned by Xenophon, || was probably con- 
tiguous to the palace, as was that of .-ittalus, 



* 



i' tcou $e rcc •jrefpvTivy.tva, o^Goi oe oi ctij^oj tuv $tvffga>, tvyunti 
$e nana. y.aXu<; eh. Xenoph. CEconom. 

rovei Ibidem Xenoph. 

Ka« rxv-xa. ^it' vhaTuv oerf/.uv y.xi 6txy.e>.Twt waoE^Ei. Ibidem 

Xenoph. 

% Either, Chap. vii. ver. 7. || CEconom. 

mentioned 



^04 $ r - Falconer on the Style and Taj?e 

mentioned by Juftin. * The hanging gardens 
of Semiramis, at Babylon, were not fo much 
adjacent to the palace, as a part of the palace 
itfel**, as feveral of the royal apartments were 
oeneath them.f 

Parks, alfo, which may be looked upon, fome- 
what, in the light of gardens, were common in 
the eaft. The younger Cyrus, we are told by 
Xenophon, % had a park at Celasnas in Phrygia, 
(locked with wild beads, for the purpofes of 
hunting. Plutarch || fpeaks of another, belong- 
ing to Tiffaphernes ; and inclofures of a fimilar 
kind, are mentioned by other writers. § 

* Juftin, L. XXXVI. C. 4 . 

•J- A» h tvnyyes t« (pur* hxpy.nxi txh 01 x>.\r.\uv vwBgo%su s 

Diodor. Lib. II. 

J E»T»uB« Kvqu ^atr^uct. yv xxi wecfxhurot; piyxq ety^u* 
S»fiui> fl?.'/;pit;, a EXEtyof edvgivu xito VXltW 07T0T£ yvptxcrxt ixviot 
fiovhom Ti »ai tou; ikttov;. Anabai. L. I. 
|| Vita Alcibiadis. 

§ TixpayuitTxt $e xxi ii$ irififtoMt, av PjXC\.\vj>$ 9«p*» ix.x7.ovv. 
i,t oe ti Tfivtov yaptov uiruMtpcx; tvftov woXv, otvo^ifft irtfytVTtO 
u.t»ov wavTo^airoi;. t* Tovru %fiuv ttxvtoiuv tvxTroyJ.tiopstx yir/>, 
Tfo<p/,? n oux. QOrtgEwrro, <W to xxt ratrni* iwue-xyioSxi, ndt 
vxoayot toi fixeihu rov S'/jgay, >jnxa uv @rjX$nr, t gturronv. 

Zozimi. L. III. C. 23. 

Venationes Regis efle in Babylone, et omnis generis 
bellias murdrum ejus tantum ambitu coerceri. 

San£l. Hieronym. in C. XIII. Efaiae. 

What 



of gardening among the Ancients. 305 

What, the tafte for gardening was, among the 
Greeks, I do not underftand. The Acade- 
mus, we know, was a woody (hady place j* and 
the trees appear to have been of the olive 
fpecies.j- It was fituated, beyond the limits^ of 
the walls, and adjacent to the tombs of the he- 
roes. I do not, however, find any particular 
account in ancient hiftory, of the manner, in 
which this grove was difpofed or laid out. It 
appears, however, to have been an elegant orna- 
mented place. § At the entrance was an altar 
dedicated to Love, which was faid to be the firfl 
erected to that Deity. Within the Academus, 
were the altars of Prometheus, of the Mufes, of 
Mercury, Minerva, and Hercules j and, at a 
fmall diftance, was the tomb of Plato. So that, 
in all probability, it was highly adapted by art, 
as well as nature, to philofophic reflection and 
contemplation. 

We are told by Plutarch, that before the time 
of Cimon, the Academus was a rude and un- 

* Atque inter Sylvas Academi quaerere verum, 

Horac. Epift. L. II. 1. 46. 

¦^ AXA fi; Ay.xanu.ia-y y.xriuv, vrro rut; (A.o£ia.iq utto§hZ;m;. 

Ariftoph. N£pE*ai. Ad. III. Sc. 3. 

% — - yvpttzaioi 7rpox<7T:sK)f ocAo-a^r,;. 

Diog. Laert. Vit. Platon. 
Non longe a Muris Academia eit. Paufan. Attica. 

§ Paufanix Ibidem. 

Vol. I. X cultivated 



306 Dr. Falconer on the Style and Tajie 

cultivated fpot: but that it was planted by 
that Genera], and had water conveyed to it;* 
whether this water was brought merely for ufe 
to water the trees, or for ornament, does not 
appear. It was divided into gymnafia, or 
places of exercife, and philofophic walks, fhaded 
with trees. Thefe are faid to have flourifli- 
ed very well, until destroyed by Sylla,j- (when 
he befieged Athens) as well as thofe in the Ly- 
ceum.J 

Near the Academy, were the gardens of the 
philofophers,§ of Plato,|| and of Epicurus,^ 
which, however, were probably but fmall. 

The fcene of Plato's Dialogue concerning 
Beauty, is elegantly defcribed, as being on the 



«.irohi!;u; «?.cro; yiryrifAivov vir ctv-rov ^o/aojj xavapoK v.a» ava-y.toii 

wi^7r*Tsi5. Plutarch Vit. Cimon. 

+ Eff£%etf)iff£ toij »£foi; ttXaio-i, v.x\ rwrt uv-aSri^ixv exfipr 
«tv^>o^cpwT«T'/;)' wgccff-iiiLn ovaxv, x.oa to Xvxiioh, Vit. Syllat. 

X The trees in the Lyceum were probably Plane trees, 
Varro quotes Theophraftus, for the relation of the large 
fize and extent of the roots of one in that place. 

De re ruftica, Cap. XXXVII. 

§ Oy.eiwj & Ktn r, uy.xoJiy,ict xxt o» xijttoj rui Qfaaffcfw. 

Strabon. L. IX. 
|| _ - - - cujus (Platonis) enim hortuli propinqui non 
memoriam folum mihi afFerunt, fed ipfum videntur in con- 
fpettu meo ponere. Cicero de finib. L. V. 

«[ In Epicuri hortis, quos modo prseteribamus. Ibidem; 

banks 



of gardening among the Ancients. 307 

banks of the river Iliffus, and under the fbade 
of the Platane; but no artificial arrangement of 
objects is mentioned, nor any thing which will 
lead us to imagine the profpect to be any other 
than merely natural. The beauty of this de- 
fcription was fo much admired, by fucceeding 
writers of philofophic dialogues,* that it was 
frequently imitated, and, at laft, to fuch a de- 
gree, that it appeared ridiculous and difguftful, 
as we may fuppofe from the caution given by 
Vlutarchf againft fuch attempts, in the proems 
to difcourfes. 

The Romans feem to have early imbibed fome- 
what of a tafte for gardens. 

Tarquin the Proud, is faid to have commu- 
nicated his intentions to his fon, concerning his 
conduct to the people of Gabii,^ by (hiking off 
the heads of the flowers in his garden, 

* Cicero was a great admirer of this paffage in Plato; 
Qua: (Platanus) videtur non tarn ipfa aquula quam Pla- 
tonis oratione crevilTe. De oratore, Lib. I. § 15. 

\ AQiXi tk ?.oyov to nv e^o* ipiroiav tj Xs^Mjuyaj y.xt cv.iaj 
x.xi xy.x xcc: "Ka.r./.ut cix$fOfA.xf Kat oca oCKKx toioi>t«v tottu* 
»7riXai?^£*oi yAt^orai t>u TIXxTinc^ Yhioaw y.xt tov ayi/or 
t*nvo)> y.lct rr/j fi^iu-a. ircojt x-vi\ jroau iriQvxKzv 'ircoQiu.crtfQV n 
na?JiiB» iir<y%x(ptc%a.i. Plutarch Amator. ad Initium, 

X Livii Lib. I. Cap. 5-4. Luc. Flor. C. 8. Dionyf. Itallic. 
It appears from all thefe accounts, that the garden was 
adjacent or contiguous to the palace. 

X a I fee 



308 Dr. Falconer on the Style and Hafie 

I fee but little mention made of a garden, 
otherwife than as a matter of utility, to produce 
articles of food, for many years after ; though I 
think it probable, they might be as matters of 
pleafure alio. The writers, however, on huf- 
bandry, Cato, Varro, Columella, and Palladius, 
make not the lead mention of a garden, as an 
objecl of pleafure, but folely, with refpecl: to its 
productions of herbs and fruits ; and I do not 
imagine it was among the earlieft articles of 
Roman luxury. The Lucullan gardens feem to 
be the fin! I can find mentioned, of remarkable 
magnificence} though, probably, from the height 
of extravagance to which thefe were arrived, - 
they were not the firfb. Plutarch fpeaks of them, 
as incredibly expenfive, and equal to the mag- 
nificence of kings.* They contained artificial 
elevations, of ground to a furprizing height, of 
buildings projected into the fea, and vaft pieces 
of water made upon land. In ihort, his extra- 
vagance and expence was fo great, that he ac- 
quired from thence the appellation of, the Roman 
Xerxes. 

t 

* Plutarch. Life of Lucullus. 

Sallufl is thought to have alluded to the Villa of Lucullus 
when, in defcribing the Roman luxury, he fays, " Nam 
quid ea memorem, quae, nifi his qui videre, nemini credi- 
bilia fun 1 : ; a privatis compluribus fubverfos montes, marra 
conftrata cffe." Bell. Catilin. 

It 



of gardening among the Ancients, 309 

It is not improbable, from the above account, 
and from the confideration of Lucullus having 
ipent much time in Afia, in a fituation, wherein 
he had an opportunity of obferving the mod 
fplendid conftiuclions of this kind, that thefe 
gardens might be laid out in the Afiatic flyle. 

Thevaft mailers of building, faid to have been 
erected, might have borne fome refemblance, in 
the arrangernent and ft vie, to the Babylonian 
gardens; and the epithet of the Roman Xerxes 
might be applicable to the tafte, as well as the 
fize and expence, of his works. 

The Tufculan Villa of Cicero, though often 
mentioned, is not, as far as I can difcover, any 
where defcribed in his works, fo as to give an 
adequate idea of the ftyle, in which his gardens 
or grounds were difpofed. 

There is but little in Virgil, that I can find, 
relative to this fubjecl. Pines,* it feems pro- 
bable, were a favourite ornament in gardens, 
and flowers, f rofes efpecially, were much ef- 

teemed. 

• Fraxinus in fylvis pulcherrima, pinus in hortis, 
Populus in fluviis, abies in montibus altis : 
Sspius at fi me, Lycida formofe, revifas, 
Fraxinus in fylvis cedet tibi, pinus in hortis. 

Virgil, Eclog. VII. I, 6 5 . & c . 

-J- Fcrfitan et, pingues hortos quae cura colendi 
Ornarct, cancrem, bitcrique rofaria Paefti : 
Quoque modo potis gaudcrcnt intyba rivis, 

X 3 Et 






5io Dr Falconer on the Style and Tajle 
teemed. Some plants alio, of the culinary kind, 
as the endive, [] ~.'t parfley, and the cucumber, 
were fometimes either planted as ornaments, 
or elle intermixed with plants of that kind, con- 
trary to modern practice. 

I apprehend that flowers and fhrubs were plant- 
ed full as much among the Romans, for the 
fake of their odour, as the beauty of their ap- 
pearance.* Perfumes were always highly valued 
in warm climates. Virgil places Anchifes f in 
Elyfium, in a grove of bays, and is careful to 
remark, that they were of the fweet fcented kind.J 
The Fffiftan rofes were chiefly valued for their 
excellent perfume; and the fame quality appears 
to be the caufe, why they were placed by TV 
bullus 1| as ornaments to the Elyfian fields. 

Et virides apio rip*, tortufque per herbam 
Crefceret in Ventrem cucumis ; nee fera conmntem 
Narciflbm, aut £exi tacuiflfem vitnen acanthi, 
Pallemefque hederas, & amantes litora royrtos. 

Georgic, L. IV. L. 118. 

* See Athenxus paflim, & Anacreon. 
Jaaat odoratos Vota per Armenios. Tibulli, L. I. Eleg. 5. 
f Inter odoratum lauri nemus. Virg. ^neid. VI. 

J Calthaque Paftanas vincet odore rofas. 

Ovid. Ep. de Pont. L- II. £L 4« 

II Floret odoratis terra benigna rofis. 

11 Tibulli L.I. Eleg. 3. 

Athensus fpeaks of the rofe, entirely with a view to its 
Odour. L. XV. p. 63 1, 682, edit. Cafaubon. 

I mint 



of gardening among the Ancients, 3 1 1 

I muft not pafs over one piece of Roman 
luxury, relative to gardens, wh is equally pre- 
valent at prefent, viz. the endeavour to produce 
flowers at feafons of the year, not fuited to their 
time of blowing. 

Rofes were then as at prefent, the principal 
flowers, upon which thefe experiments were tried, 
as appears from Martial and others. * 

The next .accounts of ancient gardens I can 
meet with, are thofe of Pliny, which, we may 
conjecture, were not only laid out according to 
his own tafte, but that, alfo, of the age in which 
he lived. 



* Ut nova dona tibi, Caefar, Nilotica tellus 
Miferat, hibernas ambitiofa rofas. 
Navita derifit Pharios Memphiticus hortos, 
Urbis ut intravit limina prima tua?. 
Tantus veris honos, et odorse gratia Floras, 
Tantaque Paeftani gloria ruris erat. 
Si quacumque vagus greflum oculofque ferebat, 
Textilibus fertis omne rubebatiter. 
At tu, Romans juflus jam cedere brumas, 
Mitte tuas mefles, accipe, Nile, Rofas. 

Martial. Epigr- L. VI. Ep. 80. 
Dat feftinatas Cacfar tibi bruma coronas : 
Quondam veris erant, nunc tua facia rofa eft. 

Epigr. L. XIV. Epig. 127. 
,/§ftiv2 nives, hibernac rofae. Lamprid. Vit. Elagab. 



X 4 His 



3 1 2 Dr. Falconer on the Style and Tajle 

His account of his Laurentine Villa,* relates 
but little to the external arrangement of gardens 
and ground, but is confined chiefly to the houfe. 

It appears, however, that the Geftatio,-f- or place 
for horfe exercife, was bordered with box, and 
where that was defective, with rofemary inter- 
twined with vines. It appears, alfo, that the 
Geftatio furrounded the garden. J The Xyftus H 
likewife, or place for foot exercife, was planted 
with violets, which feem ro have been placed 
there, on account of their odour. His defcrip- 
tion of his Tufcan Villa** is more particular. 
This feems to have pofTefTed great natural 
beauties, to which its poiTefTor attended with 
great judgment. Its fituation appears to have 
been healthy, and remarkably cool ; infomuch, 
that the olive and the myrtle would not 
thrive, nor perhaps, even grow there. This 

* The Laurentine Villa, we are told by Pliny himfelf, 
was calculated more for ufe than ornament. " Villa 
ufibus capax, non fumptuofa tutela." 

Plin. Epift. L. II. Ep. 17. 

f Geftatio buxo aut rore marino ube deficit, buxus ambi- 
tur. Adjacet geftatione interiore circuiiu vinea tenera et 
umbrofa. Ibidem PliniU 

J Hortum et geftationem videt qua hortus includitur. 

Ibidem Plinii. 
[J Ante Cryptoporticum Xyftus violis adoratus. Ibidem. 

** See Pliny's Letter to Apollinaris- 

Lib. V- Epiftol. 6. 

circum- 



of gardening among the Ancients. 3 1 3 

circumflance, owing probably, to its proxi- v 
mity to the Appennine mountains, fitted it 
for a fummer refidence. It was placed in the 
midft of a vaft natural amphitheatre, furrounded 
with hills crowned with lofty and venerable 
woods: Small rifing grounds of great fertility 
here and there occurred, which were planted on 
their fides with vines, and furrounded with 
fhrubs and under-wood. The lower grounds 
were full of flowers and plants, always green 
and flourifhing, and, probably, on account of 
the difference of temperature of the fituation, 
varying from thofe of the furrounding country. 
What added to the beauty of this fcene was, 
that it was plentifully watered by many rivulets 
from the adjacent hills, which the coolnefs of 
the fituation prevented being dried up by the 
fummer heats. No marfhy places were, how- 
ever, to be found, but the whole of the fuper- 
abundant moifture was carried off into the 
Tyber, which ran through the middle of the 
profpe£r, and completed the beauty of the fcene, 
not only as a piece of water, but alfo, as a navi- 
gable river. The Villa of Pliny was fituated 
upon one of thole rifing grounds before men- 
tioned, and enjoyed a diftant and varied profpect j 
though the afcent to the place on which it flood 
was fo gradual, as fcarcely to be fenfible to thofe 
who went up to it. 

After 



j 14 & r ' falconer on the Style and Tajle 

After this account of the natural beauties of 
this elegant fituation, which its noble pofleffor 
fecms to have been thoroughly fenfible of, and 
to have entered into with the higheft tafte and 
delight, we are furprized and forry, to fee the 
artificial part of the profpecl, form fo difgraceful 
a contrail. The Xyftus, or court before the 
portico, for walking and exercife, was parted 
into numerous divifions of diverfe fhape, all 
edged with box. The dope lawn, or defcent 
from thence, was bordered on the fides with 
figures of beads, cut in box trees. The interior 
fpace feems to have been planted (probably here 
and there only) with acanthus. Thefe were 
iurrounded by a walk, (haded by ever-greens, 
fhorn into different fhapes : and the whole again 
incircled by a riding path, which was fecured on 
the outfide by a wall, or rather mound of earth, 
covered with box trees, rifing one row abdve 
another, in form of fteps. Oppofite to the 
middle of the portico, there was a fmall court, 
forrounded by a fummer-houfe, and lhaded by 
four plane trees, in the midft of which, a 
fountain arofe into a marble bafon, and running 
over the edges, fpriukled the trees and the grafs 
underneath. In the front of the buildings, lay a 
plantation of trees, in form of an Hippodrome, 
open in the middle, in order that its whole extent 
might be perceived at one view, and incircled 
with plane trees, covered with ivy, in fuch a 

manner* 



of gardening among the Ancients. 3 1 5 

manner, as that they appeared, in their lower 
parts, to be compofed of that fhrub, while their 
tops flouriihed, in their native verdure and 
foliage. 

The ivy, fpreading from one tree to another, 
connected them together into an uniform appear- 
ance. Between each of the plane trees, box 
were planted, and behind thefe, bay trees, which 
blended their' Ihade with that of the planes. 
This plantation formed a ftreight boundary on 
each fide of the Hippodrome, and, at the end, 
bent into a femicircular form, bordered with cy~ 
prefs trees, which ferved to vary the profpefr, and 
to caft a deeper and more gloomy Ihade j whilft 
the internal circular walks, feveral of which there 
were, planted with roles, formed a contraft to the 
(hade of the others. Thefe winding paths 
terminated in a ftreight walk, which again 
divided into feveral others, feparared from one 
another by box hedges. In one place there was 
a little meadow ; in another, the box was cut 
into a thoufand different forms ; fometimes, into 
letters, exprefiing the name of the mailer ; fome- 
times, that of the artificer ; whilft here and there, 
little obelifks arofe, intermixed alternately with 
fruit trees ; and in the midft of this regularity 
of arrangement, fo fuited to the tafte of the 
inhabitants of a great city, there arofe an unex- 
pected fcene, refembling the natural beauties of 

the 



3 1 6 Dr. Falcone}' on the Style and Tafte 

the country, in the center of which lay a fpot, 
furrounded with dwarf plane trees. 

Beyond thefe, was placed a plantation of acan- 
thus, and, as you proceeded, the trees were cut 
out into various figures and fhapes. At the ter- 
mination, was an alcove feat, of white marble, 
fupported by four fmall Caryftian marble pillars. 
Underneath the feat, the water guflied out, 
through feveral fmall pipes, as if preffed out 
by the weight of thofe who repofed themfelves 
upon it. This water was again collected into 
a {lone cittern beneath,, and received, from thence, 
into a poliihed marble bafon, fo artfully con- 
trived, as to be always full without overflowing; 
though the means, by which this was brought 
about, were not obvious to the view. We are 
alfo told, that this bafon ferved, fometimes, as 
a table at fupper, the larger difhes being placed 
on the edge, whilft the fmaller fwam about, 
in form of little fhips, and wild fowl. Corres- 
ponding to this was a fountain, inceffantly filling 
.and emptying; the water being thrown up to 
a great heighth, and falling back into the bafon, 
from whence it ran off. Fronting the alcove, 
flood a marble Summer-houfe, with folding 
doors, projecting and opening into a green 
inclofure, fo that, from the upper and lower 
windows you might diftinguifh a variety of 
different verdures. Seats of marble, with foun- 
tains by their fides, were difperfed through the 

gardens j 



of gardening among the Ancients* 317 

gardens; and throughout the whole Hippodrome, 
ftreams of water were conveyed in pipes, to dif- 
ferent fpots, to water and refrefh die trees and 
verdure. 

It is obvious, that the above defcriptions bear, 
a ftriking refemblance to the tafte in gardens 
that prevailed in this country, and indeed 
throughout Europe, towards the beginning of the 
prefent century. The walks bordered with box 
and rofemary ; the terrace planted with violets, 
at the Laurentine Villa ; and the court divided 
into parterre divifions, edged wich box ; the 
figures of animals cut out in box trees, placed 
oppofite each other, upon the Hope ; with the 
furrounding walk, inclofed with tonfile ever- 
greens cut into fhapes, point out the fame re- 
femblance, in the gardens at the Tufcan Villa. 
The circular amphitheatre of box, cut into 
figures, and the walk, covered with graduated 
fhrubs, are all exactly in the fame ftyle. The 
fountains overflowing; the marble bafons ; the 
little jets d'eau about the feats, and under the 
alcove; the fudden difappearance of the water; 
the fpouts in the grafs ; the regular difpofition 
of the trees in the Hippodrome, in lines ftraight, 
and regularly curved ; together with the arrange- 
ment of the different kinds behind each other, 
make one think, Pliny was rather defcribing a 
Villa of king William, or Louis XIV. than one 

of 



,3 1 8 Dr. Falconer on the Style and Tafte 

of a Roman nobleman, and fenator, feventeen 
hundred years ago. 

Some circumftances, in the above defcription, 
appear in many refpects, abfurd and excep- 
tionable. But let us not be too hafty in our 
cenfures ; but confider, whether the nature of 
the climate and country may not vindicate 
them, in feveral refpects, from the imputations 
which might have been juftly afcribed to them, 
under different circumftances. The walks, bor- 
dered with box, a tree of clofe growth, and 
faid to flourifh extremely in that fituation, 
formed a convenient fhelter from the torrid rays 
of an Italian fun. The fhearing of the trees, 
contributed alfo to thicken their fhade, and to 
render them more commodious for this purpofe ; 
though, I confefs, it was not necefifary, for this 
end, that they fhould be clipped into awkward 
imitations of animals, &c. which, it is furprizing 
a man of the tafte of Pliny could approve. The 
fence to the garden was, in Pliny's Villa, con- 
cealed by trees, an improvement on the modern 
tafte referred to ; a long range of bare brick 
walling haying been often efteemed an object 
of beauty or magnificence. 

Fountains, likewife, and jets d'eau, however 
ufelefs, and therefore abfurd and unnatural, in 
Great Britain and Holland, may ftill be in per- 
fectly good tafte in Italy. The difperfion of* 
moifture cools the air, by the evaporation it pro- 
duces } 



cf gardening among the Ancients. 319 

duces; and the very murmur of the falling of 
water, gives the idea of coolnefs, by aflbciation 
of fenfations. They feem here to have been 
difpofed with judgment, fome of them being 
fituated near the alcove, and refting places, as 
a refrefliment to thofe fatigued with heat, and 
exercife ; and others, difperfed through the grafs, 
not to caufe a foolifh furprife, and to endanger 
the health of thofe palling that way, by wetting 
their cloaths, but to water the trees, cool the 
ground, and refrefii the verdure ; circumstances 
indifpenfable to the beauty of the fecnery and 
profpeel, in a hot climate. 

The fame apology may, I think, be made for 
the regularity of the walks, in the Hippodrome, 
and the minute parts and divifions, in which it 
was difpofed. 

• It is probable, the extent of ground itfelf was 
not large. Diftant walks would be fatisuing in 
an Italian fummer, and would be too much 
trouble and expence to keep as clofely fhaded, 
as would render them furficiently agreeable. 
They were, therefore, in a manner, compelled 
to make as'much as poflible, out of the fpacc 
of ground ; which they accomplithed, by dividing 
it into as many walks and paths as pofllble. 

The parterre, likewife, parted into beds of 
various (hapes, was necefTary for flowers, which 
were highly valued in warm climates for their 
perfume, but do not thrive, unlets kept diftinct 

and 



3 20 Dr. Falconer on the Style and Tajle 

and free from the proximity of other trees, or 
plants. 

It is remarkable here, that the tafte of the 
author, for the beauties of nature, breaks out 
among his defcription of the moft artificial 
ornaments. Immediately after defcribing the 
fence of the garden, covered with graduated 
box trees, he adds, that the adjoining meadow, 
was as beautiful by nature, as the garden had 
been rendered by art ; and, in another place, 
mentions the contrafl of the beauties of rural 
nature, with thofe of art, * as one of the chief 
ornaments of his garden. The fame apology 
that has been made for the ftyle, in which 
Pliny's gardens were laid out, is applicable to 
the eaftern gardens in general, and holds, ftill 
more ftrongly, as the heat becomes more con- 
stant and intenfe. We may farther obferve, 
that this mode fuits the difpofition of the eaftern 
people, in many other refpecls. The regularity 

* Juvenal appears to have pofTefTed a good taftc in 
gardening, and laying out ground?, from what he fays 
of the artificial grottoes at Aricinum, and the attempt 
to ornament the water, by fubftituting marble, in place 
of its natural boundary of herbage. 

In Vallem Egerias defcendimus, et fpeluncas 
Diffimiles veris : quanto prreltantius effet 
Numcn aqua?, viridi fi margine clauderet undas 
Herba, nee ingenuum violarent marmora tophum ? 

Juvenal. Satyr. III. L. 17. 

and 



of gardening among the Ancients. 321 

and formality of their manner of living, and 
manners, correfponds with their tafte for regular 
figures, and uniformity of appearance, in the 
laying out of ground. It may not, perhaps, 
be too great a refinement to remark, that fuch 
a tafte is conformable alfo to a defpotic govern- 
ment, which is jealous of all innovations, and, 
of courfe, affords no opportunity for exertions 
of genius, in any capacity. It is worthy of ob- 
fervation, that the regular tafte, above referred 
to, prevailed in this country, at a time when 
our fyftem of manners, drefs, and behaviour 
was extremely ceremonious, formal, and re- 
ferved, and approaching to thofe of the eaftern 
countries. As this ftiffnefs wore off, the tafte 
of the people improved. Shakefpeare was no 
longer cenfured for inattention to dramatic ftridt- 
nefsj the turgid, but regular bombaft of Black- 
more, fell into difrepute and ridicule, and a 
more eafy and natural ftyle was adopted, both in 
fentiment and writing. 

The general method of laying out grounds, 
in this country, feems at prefent to be very 
rational. Natural beauties, or refemblances 
thereof, are chiefly attempted j which are the 
more proper, as being more conformable to 
the climate and fituation of the country, and 
difpofition of the people, who are beft pleafed 
with great and fublime objects, which are to 
be found only in nature. The clofe walk, how- 

Vol. I. Y ever 



322 Dr. Falconer on the Style and Tajh 

ever delightful in Italy, or Perfia, is here 
judicioufly exchanged for the open grove, and 
the moifture of grafs for gravel. The tonfure 
of trees is alfo laid afide; not only as impairing 
their beauty, but alfo, as thickening their (hade, 
more than would be neceffary or agreeable, 
where a free intercourfe of air is fo requifite, 
to difpel damps and exhalations. Fountains, 
on the fame account, are laid afide, and we 
are content with the natural current of dreams, 
which exhale lefs moifture, [and produce lefs 
cold, than water fpouted into the air by the 
fantaftic, but lefs beautiful diftribution of it by 
ajetd'eau; The gardens, or pleafure grounds, 
in our country, are likewife very properly of 
much larger extent, than thofe in hot climates. 
Pleafure, in the latter, is always combined with 
fomewhat of indolence and inaction ; in the 
former, it is connected with exercife and activity. 
A large fcope of ground, therefore, that afforded 
opportunity for the latter, would be more con- 
formable to the genius of the people, as well 
as to the climate in which the luxurious indul- 
gence, fo delightful when the heat is intenfe, 
could very feldom be fafely praclifed. On the 
whole, I am inclined to believe, that notwith- 
flanding our want of the ornaments proper for 
hot climates, in our gardens and pleafure 
grounds, Great Britain is capable of afford- 
ing more real and genuine beauty in views of 

this 



of gardening among the Ancients. 323 

this kind, than is, perhaps, any where elfe to 
be met with. The fine and regular verdure, 
which always clothes both the earth and the 
trees j the variety of the herbage, and the fize to 
which oaks and other foreft trees, congenial 
to the country, will arrive, impart a beauty 
and magnificence to our profpects, and afford 
opportunities for the judicious interpofition of 
art, far fupepior to what is to be met with, 
where thefe advantages do not occur. 

We are ftruck with claflic defcriptions, and 
affected by the circumftances which, by their con- 
nection, they recall to the memory ; but fetting 
thefe afide, I make no doubt, a grove of hnglith 
oaks would be a more beautiful, as well as a 
more magnificent object, than " the olive grove 
of Academe," or that of plane trees in the 
Athenian Lyceum. 

After all, it is pofllble to err in too clofely 
following Nature, as it is in neglecting her. 
There are beauties of the artificial kind, as well 
as natural, which are proper to be introduced 
into fcenes of this kind. Statues, buildings, and 
other ornaments, in good tafte, and well executed, 
may unite with great propriety with natural 
objects, and heighten their effect. I do not 
fpeak of thefe ornaments, as to any particular 
beauties they may individually poifefs, but 
merely as coinciding with the general effect, and 
mature of the profped. They are, however, to 

Y 2 be 



324 Dr. Falconer on the Style and Ta/te, &rV. 

be employed cautioufty, fince, if iniudicioufly, 
or even too frequently introduced, they give an 
air of frivoloufnefs and affectation to the whole, 
which renders it an object of contempt and 
ridicule, rather than of admiration. 

More, I think, might be faid againft ex- 
cluding parterres of flowers, which were fo con- 
(lant attendants upon the old gardens, and fo 
rarely feen at prefent. We all know, that feve- 
ral kinds of flowers are exquifitely beautiful, 
and that their beauty and perfection depends 
on certain circumftances, relative to their cul- 
ture. Great care is necefTary, and a feparation 
from other plants, both of which fugged the 
parterre as the molt proper and convenient way 
of producing them. I confefs, parterre divifions 
poflefs no remarkable beauties in themfelves, 
but I think, at the fame time, that rhey have no- 
thing fo fhocking, to the mod delicate tafte, 
that fhould hinder their being employed, when 
they are the harbingers of fuch beautiful 
productions of nature. A fquare, or an oblong 
border, has nothing obvioufly abfurd or difguft- 
ing in its appearance j and as to its being 
artificial, it may be faid in defence of it, that it 
is not an imitation of any thing in nature, nor 
meant to be fo, but folely calculated for utility, 
as an inftrument necefTary to the production of 
beauty ; and, confidered in this view, we might, 
with equal reajbn, object againft a houfe, as an 

unnatural, 



Mr. White on the Regeneration 325 

unnatural, and therefore, an improper object, 
as againft the divisions of a flower parterre. 

I grant, indeed, that they have been whimfi- 
cally, and often abfurdly arranged, and fafhioned; 
but fuch I do not here defend. I only maintain 
the caufe of parterres, on account of the beau- 
ties, which they are neceflary to produce: not 
of any they themfelves poflefs. 



On the Regeneration of Animal Substances. 
By Charles White, Efq. F. R. S. &c. Read 

December 18, 1782. 

""HE great Author of the creation has en- 
dowed the animal world with a wonderful 
power of repairing and recruiting its various 
compound machines, and not only filling up 
and making good loft fubftances, but in fome 
inftances, of even totally regenerating parts -, 
but we muft not from hence accufe him of 
partiality, in not doing it in every inftance ; for 
the further we carry our researches into the 
fecrets of Nature, the more we fhall be convinced 
of the great and unbounded wifdom of God, 
and of the extraordinary refources he has placed 
in her poffeflion ; 

V 3 - - - The 



326 Mr. White on the Regeneration 

V The firft Almighty caufe 

AQ.s not by partial, but by general laws. 

Pope's EfTay on Man: 

The Deity has drawn the line, has fixed the 
limits, and has faid to Nature, hither (halt thou 
go, and no further. 

If this order does not appear to us to be 
uniformly preferved, we mud not conclude that 
it is not really fo, but that it is owing to our 
(lender capacities, that we are unable to trace 
his hand through all his ways, 

" See and confefs, one comfort Hill muft rife, 
*¦* 'Tis this, tho' man's a fool, yet God is wife." 

Loc. citat. 

The ancients knew that a frefh broken bone 

would unite by a callus, that wounds of the fiefh 

would fill up by what is called incarnation, and 

would be healed over with fkin, by what is called 

cicatrization. But all vain glorious boa'fting 

man muft not from hence pretend, that he can 

make a fingle fibre grow : this is the act of 

Nature only. The ableft furgeon living, can 

do no more than affift her, remove the prefent 

obftacles, and prevent others being thrown irj 

her way. 

«' Yes Nature's road muft ever be preferr'd ; 
*' Reafon is here no guide, but ftill a guard." 

Loc. citat. 

The moderns have carried this matter further. 

I did myfelf the honour to lay before the 
Royal Society, a remarkable cafe of a broken 

bone, 



of Animal Subftances. 327 

bone, which was inferted in the Philofophical 
Tran factions, vol. LI. part the fecond, for the 
year 1760, in which Nature was difappointed 
of her ufual method of throwing out a callus, 
and after more than fix months had elapfed, 
without an union j when all obftacles were re- 
moved, by cutting off the ends of the bone, the 
offeous mattcc fliot out as freely as if it had 
been from a recent fracture, and the broken bone 
was perfectly united. Since the publication of 
this cafe, a great number of fimilar ones have 
occurred both to myfelf and others, which incon- 
teftably prove, that though Mature is difappointed 
in her work, even for a long time together, yet, 
when all obstructions are removed, flae is ever 
ready to exert herfelf. 

In the year 1768, I cut off the upper head of 
the os humeri of Edmund Pollit, aged fourteen, 
whofe cafe is related in the LIX. volume of the 
Philofophical Tranfactions. This was much 
corroded with matter, part of it confumed, and 
followed by an exfoliation of a large piece of the 
whole fubftance of the bone ; yet the head neck, 
and part of the body of it were actually regene- 
rated, and the entire ufe of the joint preferved. 

Mr. William Johnfton, furgeon at Dumfries, 
has given us a cafe in the Edinburgh Medical 
Eflays, * where the whole tibia, the principal 

• Vol. V. P . 452. 

¥ 4 bone 3 



328 M. White on the Regeneration 

bone of the leg, being caft off by exfoliation, 
was regenerated, and was, in a little time, as 
ufeful as the old one. 

Mr. Le Cat mentions a cafe in the Philofo- 
phical Tranfactions,* of a child of three years old, 
fjrom whom he extracted the entire tibia, exoftofed 
and carious in its whole extent, between the two 
articulations; which had remained found: this 
great deficiency of bony fubftance was entirely 
fupplied again by nature, and the patient re- 
gained a new tibia, much firmer than that which 
he had loft. 

In the fame place, he relates the cafe of an 
adult perfon where he took out three inches and 
ten lines of the bone of the upper arm, which 
was followed by a regeneration of bony matter. 
In this cafe the form of the bone, as well as its 
natural length, was preferved, -f 

Both in compound luxations and in caries,;}; 
the heads of the principal bones, and confider- 
able portions of their bodies have been fawn 
off", and regenerated, fuch as the tibia, fibula, 
humerus, radius, ulna, thumb, and finger; the 
bones were little or no fhorter, and new joints 
were formed, with fuch a degree of motion, 
that the patients found little or no inconve- 
nience, and were able to follow their bufinefs 
as well z.s ever. 

* Vol. LVI. p. 270. 

f Gocch's Cafes, vol. I. p. 323. 

J Phil. Tranf. vol. LIX. p. 39. 

Dr. 



of Animal Subjlances. 329 

Dr. Hunter, in his reflections on cutting the 
fymphyfis of the pubis,* fays, tf as to any pro- 
perty which living ligaments poflfefs of ftretching, 
under violence, permitting diflocations without 
laceration, I have long taught, that though a 
very general opinion, it feems not to have been 
founded in obfervation. Ligaments will not 
allow of diflocations in dead bodies without la- 
ceration ; and elasticity to any degree either in 
ligaments or tendons, would ill agree with their 
ufe in living bodies, which is to keep the parts 
ftrongly together; and accordingly, fince this 
opinion has routed attention and examination, 
every cafe of a recent diflocation that I have 
known examined, has been found complicated 
with a laceration of the ligaments." 

Mr. John Hunter, in his Chirurgical Lectures 
goes further, and fays, " that a luxated bone not 
reduced, by pre fling againft another bone, digs a 
cavity for itfelf, which gets cartilaginous edges 
and cartilage on all its furface; nay, a fynovial 
gland fecreting fynovia, and a new joint is fet up. 
In the fracture of a bone, though the parts be 
thrown at fome diftance, a callus is formed, 
which unites them. It is agreeable to the fame 
uniformity of operation, that when a bone is 
broken, which was originally formed in a nidus 
of cartilage, the renovated bone alfo forms in 
cartilage; while a bone, originally formed in 

* Letter to Dr. Vaugban, p. 86. 

membrane, 



330 Mr. White on the Regeneration 

membrane, when it is partially deftroyed, is re- 
produced in membrane." All furgeons muft have 
cbferved this, that in old diflocations which have 
not been reduced, there is always fome degree 
of motion more or lefs in the diflocated joint, 
except it has been complicated with a fra&ure. 

In a converfation I lately had with Dr. Monro, 
he confirmed Dr. Hunter's opinion, with the 
relation of the two following diffeftions. He 
immerfed a dead child in warm water, till it was 
perfectly foft and flexible; he then diflocated 
the (houlder. Upon differing the parts, he 
found the capfular ligament lacerated. 

A man in Edinburgh was killed by a fall from 
a horfe, and his (houlder was at the fame time 
diflocated Upon diffe&ion in this cafe alfo, he 
found the capfuiar ligament lacerated. 

Dr. Monro told me, he did not in the lead 
doubt what Mr. John Hunter had advanced on 
this fubject; and informed me, that he had a 
cafe, laft winter, of a patient who had an exfolia- 
tion of half the lower jaw, particularly of the 
whole condyle on the left fide ; the loft part was 
regenerated, he had the entire ufe of the jaw, 
and the joint was as perfect as on the other fide, 
except being a little fuller, and attended with 
a trifling degree of hardnefs. I had the fatisfac- 
tion of feeing the exfoliated bone amoneft his 
valuable collection, and found the head of the 
bone perfect, except a little carious on one fide. 

in 



of Animal Subftances. 33 1 

In the fame collection I faw an aftragalus, (one 
of the bones of the foot) which had come away 
entire, and the patient, as Mr- Fyfe informed 
me, had the perfed ufe of his foot and ancle. 
I likewife faw in the fame place, a thigh bone, 
which had been broken, the ends had not co- 
aptated, but had overfhot each other three inches, 
and were perfectly united- Cafes of this fort 
I have often feen, and have now a thigh bone 
by me, united in the fame manner -, but in 
that bone in the pofTeflion of Dr. Monro, there 
is this circumftance, which I had never before 
obferved, (hat the fides of the bone had not 
approximated each other, but in one point. 
The callus had (hot out in fuch a manner as to 
form cancelli, and the void fpace had all the 
appearance of having contained a medullary fub- 
ftance. Dr. Monro told me he had a whole cheft 
of regenerated bones in his pofTeflion. He like- 
wife defcribed to me the following experiment, 
he had made. 

He laid open the abdomen of a pig for feveral 
inches, in fuch a manner, that the interlines 
protruded; which convinced him, that all the 
integuments were completely divided. He then 
reduced the inteflines, and fewed up the wound. 
After it was perfectly united, he killed the pig. 
He then made incifions above and below, and on 
one fide of the cicatrix ; after which, he injected 
the aorta j and, though there was not a poffibjlity 

of 



33 2 Mr. White on the Regeneration 

of the injection entering but on one fide of the 
cicatrix, yet the arteries, on both fides, were 
perfectly injected, a convincing proof, that they 
muft have regenerated, for it cannot be fup- 
pofed that the mouths of fo many fmall veffels 
could poffibly have coaptated, fo as to have con- 
tinued the circulation through the cicatrix. 
I had the fatisfaction of feeing both the pre- 
paration and an engraving from it, which, it 
is hoped, the doctor will favour the public with, 
together with the feveral other valuable experi- 



ments.* 



Teeth have regenerated in every period of 
life. Mr. Thornton, a very ingenious medical 
fludent at Edinburgh, informed me, that he had 
a found tooth drawn by miftake fome years ago, 
which as foon as he found out he immediately 
replaced. It grew again, and was as good in 
every refpect as any other. But in procefs of 
time, this tooth began to decay, and give him 
pain, which became exquifite whenever the tooth 
was touched, even in the flighted manner. He 
therefore had it drawn, and one of the fangs was 
found to be carious. From this it is very evi- 
dent, that nerves will grow again, after being 
difunited. 

* Since this paper was read before the Society, Dr. Monrp 
has publifhed hii ufeful and ingenious obfervations on the 
nervous fyftem, with the engravings of thefe preparations. 
Vid. Tab. XLVI. and Tab. XL VII. 

Mr, 




/u/ vh 'tint ' /r/tsi / (r. JJ 



//ts fatted J/ T/f .>//tu>.) ///¦ ZiAttV tt*/t,'rr //tr , 7>//t tea.* . '///i/ft//,//^. 



- ,>y 

S> :7 ... * 



,-'¦¦ 



-;'/. 



of Animal Sv.bjiames. 233 

Mr. Cruikfhanks, in his Letter to Mr. Clare, 
p. 87, fays, " Not only the brain, but the nerves 
alfo, appear to have other properties than we have 
hitherto apprehended. Some years ago, I de- 
monftrated, by experiments on living animals, 
that nerves divided unite again ; and that when 
portions had been cut out, they were regene- 
rated : in both inftances the animals perfectly 
recovered. Xhefe experiments I hope foon to 
be able to lay before the public; meantime I 
am happy to find, they have been recently con- 
firmed by fo great authority, as the Abbe ton- 
tana, to whom I communicated my difcovery, 
and mewed my preparations of united and rege- 
nerated nerves."* 

Mr. Gooch has given us a remarkable cafe of 
the cuticle and nails,-j- being frequently caft off 
and regenerated, particularly in the feet and 
hands, fometimes twice in a year. Thofe of the 
hands were caft off whole, an<| we are furnifhed 
with an engraving of a pair of thefe cuticular 
gloves. 

* Dr. Monro, in the work before mentioned, has given 
a plate (Vid. Tab. XIV.) to (hew the regeneration of the 
fciatic nerves, which had been divided in living frogs, and 
difiecled twelve months after. The regenerated parts are 
of a darker colour than the original nerves, which proves, 
that there was not a mere coaptation of the divided ends. 

f Philofophical Tranfaftion% vol. LIX. p. 281. 

There 



334 Mr. White on the Regeneration 

There is another fimilar cafe related by Mr. 
Latham, * but with this difference, that this 
patient did not caft her nails. 

By performing the operation for the cure of 
the aneurifm, feveral inches of the trunks of the 
principal arteries, both of the arm and the thigh, 
have been deftroyed j yet in a few days, the cir- 
culation through the whole limb, has been car- 
ried on, as perfectly, as before the operation. 
The method, which nature has taken for accom- 
plishing this bufinefs, may be feen by an engrav- 
ing f from a preparation which I made, and 
which Dr. Hunter has done me the honour to give 
a place amongft his valuable collection. 

There is a very extraordinary hiftory of a glans 
penis regenerated after amputation, related by 
Mr. Jamifon, furgeon at Kelfo, and inferted in 
the Edinburgh Medical EfiTays.^ The young 
man was married, in that country, about two 
years after the cure, has had two children, and 
complains not of want or defect even in fenfatior^. 

Crabs and lobfters caft their fhells, both from 
their bodies, less, and claws, and even cafl their 
ftomachs, generally every year, which are im- 
mediately regenerated. The (hell is renewed 
by a fluid, which they eject -, and it inverts their 
whole body, growing hard and dry, in a fhorr 

• Philof. Tranfa&ions vol. LX. p. 451. 
\ See my Cafes in Surgery, p. 140. 
J Vol. VI. p. 434. 

time, 



of Animal Subflances. ^? 

time, and becoming as ftrong a fhell, as that 
which they had before. But, what is more ex- 
traordinary, they frequently lofe a leg or a claw 
in their combats, which are very frequent and 
furious : the loll part will be regenerated in about 
three weeks, and be almoft of its natural fize. 
Brown, in his hiftory of Jamaica, informs us 
that the claw of the violet crab, in feizin°- its 
food, catches fuch an hold, that the animal lofes 
its limb foorier than its grafp ; the claw conti- 
nuing its retentive power for above a minute, 
whilft the crab is moving off. 

In the polypus, not only young ones will grow 
out like warts from different parts of the body, 
dropoff, live, and grow j but you may cut them 
into a thoufand pieces, and turn them infide out, 
and they will ftill live, and do well ; this is ac- 
counted for by its whole body being compofed 
of ftomach and parts of generation. The latter 
not being peculiar organs, but merely particles 
of the ftomach, which are its body, each part 
of which has the power of producing the like. 
Its food is converted into chyle, in the ftomach ; 
abiorbents opening into the part, take up the 
chyle, and thefe, at fome diftance from their 
mouths, become arteries. 

If the Aftinia Urtica Marina, Animal flower, or 
Sea Anemone be cut through the middle, either 
tranfverfely or longitudinally, both parts will 
furvive the operation. Nay further, if you tear 

them 



2%6 Mr. White on the Regeneration 

them from the rock or (hell, to which they gene- 
rally adhere, and a fhred is lefc behind, it will 
become a frefh and perfect animal. 

The earth-worm and fea-worm will live after 
being cut in two ; but, what is molt furprizing, 
the fmall red headed earth-worm, being cut in 
two, both extremities furvive the operation; the 
head produces a tail, with the anus, the intef- 
tines, the anular mufcles, and the prickly beards : 
the tail on the other hand, is feen to ihoot forth 
the noble organs, and, in lefs than three months 
fends forth a head, heart, together with all the 
apparatus and inftruments of generation. Thefe 
parts, as may be eafily fuppofed, were produced 
much flower than the former; a new head taking 
nearly three months for its completion ; a new 
tail fhooting forth in lefs than as many weeks. 
The lizard, and alfo the viper caft their fkin, 
and fome fay their tail, and even their eyes ; and 
the lea Aug is faid to caft its head ; all which are 
regenerated. 

The buck cafts its horns every fpring, which 
are reproduced in a few months. But if he be 
caftrated when young, he will have no horns at 
all, or fmall buds only, and thofe foft to the 
touch, like velvet, and void of firmnefs. Dr. 
Ruflel informs us, that he had two old bucks 
caftrated at the end of February, and their horns 
dropped cff, the twenty-firft of March following ; 
fo that the fall of their horns was anticipated 

five 



of Animal Subjlances. 337 

five weeks at lead. Theie horns were renewed, 
next year, and were longer than the buck's of 
the fame age ; but the palms, or collateral 
branches, were lefs and fhorter, and neither the 
velvet of the horns, nor the horns themfelves 
were ever caft afterwards. 

I fhall now beg leave to lay before the Society, 
two cafes, that have not been publifhed, in order 
to prove ftill further the doctrine I have been 
endeavouring to eftablifh. 

Roger Nuttal, of Bury, twenty years of age, 
was admitted an in-patient of the Manchefter 
infirmary under my care, on the 23d of January, 
1775, f° r a tumor on his back- Upon firipping 
off his Ihirt, to mew me the tumor, 1 was ftruck 
with a very fingular appearance of a flump of 
the right humerus. 1 afked him, if he was born 
with it in that form, or whether his arm had 
been taken off. He informed me, that Mr. Kay 
Allen had taken his arm off clofe to the 
fnoulder, when he was but four years old, and 
that the Mump was grown again to that length, 
which feemed to be about eight inches longer 
than he defcribed it to have been, immediately 
after the amputation. I enquired both of his 
mother, and Mr. Allen, as to the truth of his 
relation, which they both confirmed ; and the 
latter, with this addition, that the arm was taken 
off, as near the moulder, as the application of 
the tournequet would permit. The bone had 

Yqj.. I. Z every 



¦ 



33 8 M. White on the Regeneration 

every degree of firmnefs, and folidity, and the 
flump was warm to the extreme point, and he 
informed me, was perfectly fenfible when 
touched. Along with this, you will receive a 
drawing of the young man, and the appearance 
which the (lump made, executed by your in- 
genious Secretary Mr. Bew, at the time the 
patient was at the Infirmary. 

Some years ago, 1 delivered a lady of rank 
of a fine boy, who had two thumbs upon one 
hand, or rather, a thumb double from the firft 
joint! the outer one rather lefs-than the other, 
each part having a perfect nail. When he was 
about three years old, I was defired to take 
off the leiTer one, which I did j but to my great 
aftonimment it grew again, and along with it, 
the nail. The family afterwards went to refide 
in London, where his father (hewed it to that 
excellent operator, William Bromfield, Efq. fur- 
oeon to the Queen's houfehold, who faid, he 
fuppofed that Mr. White, being afraid of 
damaging the joint, had not taken it wholly out, 
but he would diffed it out entirely, and then 
it would not return. He accordingly executed 
the plan, he had defcribed, with great dexterity, 
and turned the ball fairly out of the focket; 
notwithstanding this, it grew again, a frelli nail 
was formed, and the thumb remains in this ftate. 
The conclufions I would draw from thefe 
fadts, are, that, in the human fpecies, not only 

flefh. 



of Animal Suhjlances. 239 

flefh, (kin, and bones, may be regenerated, but 
membranes, ligaments, cartilages, glands, blood 
veffels, and even nerves ; and this for the wifeft 
purpofes, that every part may be repaired in its 
own kind, and in Tome manner reftored by the 
coagulable lymph, which is poured out, and 
becomes vafcular, and forms organized parts. 

By this wife provifion of nature, the many 
accidents to which we are continually expofed, 
are often more compleatly repaired, than arc 
could be able to accomplim- 

In fome animals, we fee this regenerating 
and living principle, carried flill to a much, 
greater length, where not only whole limbs, 
but even the more noble organs are reproduced. 
The ftudy of nature is not only engaging and 
pleafant to a high degree, but it infpires us with 
fuch a refpecl: and admiration of the Almighty 
Being, that it is impofTible either for a Naturalift 
or an Anatomift to be an Atheift. 

They have conftandy before their eyes fo 
many wonderful living machines, differently 
wrought, yet fo compleatly fafhioned, and all 
tending to one great point, the prefervation 
of themfelves and their fpecies j in which, there 
are fo many orders of veffels, one depending 
upon another, yet compleat in themfelves ; 
capable of repairing injuries they may fuftain, 
and even of rcftoring loft fubftances j that 
men, who daily fee fuch objects, mull be con- 

Z 2 vinced, 



34-o Mr. White on the Regeneration, &c. 

vinced, that thefe admirable fabrics cannot have 
proceeded from chance, but mud have been 
the work of an Omnipotent Creator, who has 
formed them with the mod perfect wifdom, and 
attention to their feveral interefts and fituations ; 

'* And fpite of pride, in erring reafon's fpite, 
" One truth is clear, Whatever is, is right." 

Pope's Eflay on Man. 

P. S. Mr. Parke, of Liverpool, in a Pamphlet 
he has lately publiihed, intitled, " An account 
of a new Method of treating Difeafes of the 
Joints of the Knee and Elbow," has given us 
a cafe, which fell under the care of Mr. Wain- 
man, of Skipton in Craven ; and, as it is perhaps 
the fulled confirmation, that can poffibly happen, 
of the regeneration, of not only the head of a bone, 
but of the capfular ligument, and fynovial glands, 
and even every appendage of a joint, it may, per- 
haps, be thought to be a proper fupplement to 
this paper. 1 fhall therefore give the cafe in 
Mr. Wainman's own words. He defcribes it, 
as " a violent luxation of the cubitus, occafioned 
by a fall from a horfe in full fpeed, which forced 
the os humeri, through the common integuments, 
a confiderable length into the ground, and the 
bone was quite denudated." He adds, "There 
was not a poflibility of reducing it, and I 
thought it molt eligible to take off the limb, 

which 



On Hunting, Shooting, &c» 341 

which the family objected to. I called in Dr. 
Taylor, who was of my opinion j but it would 
not be complied with. We then judged it belt 
to faw off the os humeri, which I did, about 
an inch above the finus that receives the 
olecranon. I then placed the arm, in fuch a 
pofition, as I thought would be moft advanta^ 
geous, prognosticating, that an anchylofis would 
enfue, in which I was miftaken j the perfon is 
now living, and can perform all the motions of 
the joint, which is as flexible, as if nothing 
had ever been amifs." 



An Essay on the Diversions c/Hunting, Shoot- 
ing, Fi s h 1 n g , &c . confidered as compatible with 
Humanity. Read January 15, 1783. 

TXT'HILST the general constitution of fociety 
remains, fuch as that no man, however 
obfcure, can be confidered as unconnected with 
the reft of his fpeciesj whilft, in every fituation, 
our conduct and fentiments, in fome degree, 
invariably produce an influence on thofe of 
others; no inquiry, which refpects the genuine 
motive of fuch actions, as are frequently com- 

Z 3 mittedj 



342 On Hunting, Shooting, &c. 

mitted, whether their object be, the pleafure of 
the individual, or the benefit of fociety, ought 
to be regarded as unworthy of ferious attention. 

The prevailing, though much to be lamented 
propenfity of individuals, to juftify their own 
failings, by the detection of fimilar weaknefs in 
fuperior characters, renders fuch an investigation 
the more neceffary •, and if, in the profecution 
thereof, it fhould appear, that unworthy motives 
have been erroneoufly afcribed to fome actions, 
which may be traced to a different lource; or 
that from the peculiar conftitution of human 
nature, fome weaknefTes are infeparable from 
kindred excellence; fuch difcoveries would prove 
ufeful acquifitions to our fund of knowledge ; 
they would tend to rectify the miftaken con- 
ceptions of the ignorant, or to improve the 
difcriminating faculty in thofe, who are molt 
eafily feduced by the influence of exam. le. 

In reafoning concerning a fpecies of animals, 
which we fuppofe, governed by a principle 
fuperior to that of inftinct, it is defirable to 
trace a confiftency between fentiments and 
actions, as on this alone, our claim to virtue and 
to reafon feems founded. On a fuperficial 
furvey, however, fuch a confiftency appears 
but ill Supported in the conduct of thofe, who, 
whilft they difcharge all the moral duties, and 
in an efpecial manner, practife the virtues of 
hofpitality, humanity, and benevolence, are 

yet 



On Hunting, Shooting, &c. 343 

yet capable of difcovering considerable pleafure 
from thofe amufements, the profefTed objed of 
which is, to deprive of life an innocent animal, 
unacquainted with thofe defires which fpring 
from luxury, and afking no more of the bounties 
of our common Parent, than is neceffary to its 
own fupport and exiftence. 

To be prompted to fuch anions, not from 
any neceffity co gratify the wants of nature, but 
folely from the defire of amufement, appears, 
at firft view, repugnant to every principle of 
humanity, and fecms more characteristic of the 
ferocity of a favage, than of the clemency of a 
civilized being. What then fhall we conclude! 
Are there no characters exempt from incon- 
fiftency ? Or is virtue an empty name, without 
precife meaning ? The mind (brinks with 
averfion from either conclufion. Let us there- 
fore take a more intimate view of the motives 
to fuch actions, and, perhaps, they may admit 
a folution, lefs repugnant to our feelings. 

From the attributes juftly afcribed to the 
benevolent Author of our exiftence, we may 
fafely conclude, that every propenfity, with 
which the human mind is endowed, is not only 
neceffary, but even conducive to our happinefs, 
whilft indulged in a proper degree. This is 
not more true, of the mild and gentle difpo- 
fitions, thofe which feem to be houiifhed by the 
fl milk of human kindnefs," than of our more 

Z 4 active 



344 ® n Hunting, Shooting, iic. 

active and lively propenfities, thofe which excite 
to the mod vigorous and toilfome exertions. 

The love of fame gives a glow, an enthufiafm, 
to the feelings of the polfeiTor, when e'reum- 
fcribed within proper limits, which leads him 
to combat fatigue and danger, to triumph over 
toil and difficulty, and fmile amidft the anguifh. 
of pain and death. Yet the fame paflion, uncon- 
troled by reafon, hath prompted the mod abjecT: 
fubmiffion, the mod licentious excefs; it hath 
produced the mod baneful diforders in fociety, 
and, indead of deifying human nature, hath 
made earth the abode of thofe fpirits, which the 
poets have afllgned to the confines of Tartarus. 

We may remark the fame, of every other 
difpofition of the human mind, in the exercife 
of which, the excefs, or the deficiency alone is 
injurious; but there is none, the limited ufe 
whereof, doth not contribute to the happinefs 
of the individual, and the good of fociety. 

Not to wander, however, too far from our 
fubject, let us, for a moment, confider man 
in a date of nature, whilft he is yet unacquainted 
with the bledings which fpring from civilization, 
or has conceived an idea of pleafure, fuperior 
to that which arifes from the gratification of his 
appetites. His own perfonal fafety, with that 
of thofe who are dependent on his protection, 
joined to the daily cravings of nature, fird dictate 
the neceflity of waging war with many of thofe 

animals^ 



On Hunting, Shooting, &c. 345 

animals, with whom he hath hitherto lived "joint 
tenant of the fhade." 

Perhaps thefe neceffities, however, would not 
always be fufficient to overcome that love of 
eafe, whict is fo natural to a ftate, wherein men 
feem only a fmall degree elevated above the 
rank of brutes. Perhaps, if other inducements 
were not fupperadded, he would not be ftudious 
to plan, bold to refolve, and active to engage 
in thofe dangers and enterprizes, without which, 
he mud frequently be deprived of this fpecies 
of food, and obliged to fubftitute others, more 
eafily gained, but lefs adapted to the health and 
vigour of the animal ceconomy. Without in- 
fitting too much on thefe prefumptive reafons, 
it is certainly a kind provifion in the constitution 
of man, that thofe exertions, which are dictated 
by neceffity, fhould alfo be infpired by inclina- 
tion ; and that, whilft his employment is made 
fubfervient to the means of his exigence, it 
Ihould alfo become a principal inftrument of his 
pleafures. 

Thefe remarks, however, principally apply to 
the rude and favage ftate of man, which, happily 
for fociety, is now almoft unknown. There is 
no longer a neceffity for an individual to be 
Jiimfelf the executioner of the animal deftined 
to his fubfiftence ; yet, as hunting, fhooting, 
angling, &c. are ftill purfued, with as much 
avidity as formerly, it is neceffary, if we propofe 

to 



346 On Hunting, Shooting y &c. 

tojuftify thefe diverfions, to attempt it on prin- 
ciples, which apply to a flate, wherein men are 
humanized, by laws and government, and by 
the refining influence of arts, fciences, and re- 
ligion. 

It will be generally allowed, that the health 
and vigour of the intellectual, as well as of the 
corporeal fyftem, require frequent exercife, and 
that their very exiftence almoft depends upon it. 
It is alfo pretty evident, that to induce fuch a 
degree of exertion as will promote thefe ends, 
there muft be fomething to ftimulate and incite ; 
the final caufe being too remote an object. 
Hence, every amufement which exercifes the 
powers and faculties of man, if not improperly 
expenfive, nor necefiarily attended with a neglect 
of more noble and important purfuits, is, in 
this point of view, not only not cenfurable, but 
meritorious. 

Such, however, is the conftitution of man, 
that health alone will not fatisfy his afpirations 
after happinefs •, and it is clear, that exer- 
cife is not more necefiary to the perfection of 
his faculties, than to the promotion of his 
pleafures. In the words of an elegant writer, 
equally diftinguifhed for depth of thought, and 
benevolence of character.* " Labour is the 
chief ingredient of the felicity to which man 

* Sec the Stoic, Hume's Eflays. 

afpires, 



On Hunting, Shooting, &c. 347 

afpires, and all his enjoyments foon become in- 
fipid and diftafteful, when not acquired by fa- 
tigue and induftry. See the hardy hunters rife 
from their downy couches, make off the (lum- 
bers which dill weigh down their heavy eyelids, 
and ere Aurora has yet covered the earth with 
her flaming mantle, haften to the foreft. They 
have behind, in their own houfes, and in the 
neighbouring plains, animals of every kind, 
whofe flem furnifhes the mod delicious fire, and 
which offer themfelves to the fatal ftroke. La- 
borious man difdains fo'eafy a purchafe. He feeks 
for a prey, which hides itfelf from his fearch, or 
flies from his purfuit, or defends itfelf from his 
violence. Having exerted in the chafe, every 
paffion of the mind, and every member of the 
body, he then finds the charms of repofe, and 
with joy compares its pleafures to thofe of his 
engaging labours." 

If exercife, then, be neceffary to the health and 
well-being of man j if it be alfo neceffary to 
thofe pleafures, for which nature hath infpired 
him with the third 5 and if hunting, mooting 
and fifhing furnifh ftimulating motives, which, 
in their abfence, it would not be eafy to fupply; 
thefe diverfions may be efteemed both innocenc 
and virtuous, whilft confidered folely with re- 
fpect to the agent ; and it remains only to 
examine, how far, to the united motives of 
pleafure and advantage to man, other reafons 

may 



348 On Hunting, Shooting, 6?r. 

may be added, in juftification of actions, which 
refped the lives and happinefs of the brute 
creation. 

Man, as lord of the creation, regards every 
Other animal as intended for his neceffary ufe, 
and fubfervient to his reafonable purpofes. This 
prerogative feems to have been intended for him 
in the original conftitution of things ; and it is 
fully evident, that the proper exercife of it, is not 
more favourable to his own, than to the general 
good. Of fome animals he prolongs the lives, 
and provides for the fupport, to make them con- 
ducive to his own convenience. Others, doomed 
to contribute to his fuftenance, are cut off ere 
they attain maturity.* Even if it were not 
expedient to facrifice thefe to the indifpenfible 
wants of man, necejjity would equally prompt 
him to their deftrucrion ; fince, if they were 
left uninterruptedly to provide for their own 
fupport, and to propagate their fpecies, their 
increafe would foon be incompatible with 
his exiftence, and probably, with that of their 
own. 

It would, perhaps, be too hafty an affertion, 
to affirm, that death to brutes is no evil. We 
are not competent to determine, whether their 
exiftence, like our own, may not extend to fome 

* In the laft clafs may be enumerated molt of the vi&ims 
to the diverfions we fpealc of. 

future 



On Hunting, Shooting, &c. 349 

t 

future mode of being, or whether the prefenc 
limited fphere is all in which they are interefted! 
On fo fpeculative a queftion, little could be 
advanced with precifion -, nor is it necefiary 
for the inveftigation of the fubject before us. 
If we may be allowed to reafon only from 
what we know, it may fafely be conjectured, 
that death to brutes is no pofitive evil ; we 
have no reafon to ' believe, they are indued 
with the gift of forefight, and therefore, even 
admitting that with them the pleafures of life 
exceed its pains and its cares, in terminating 
their exiftence, they only fuffer a privation of 
pleafure. 

Though the tie of natural affection is, per- 
haps, not lefs ftrong in brutes, than in the human 
fpecies, yet it is often neceffarily diffolved, and 
of much fhorter continuance. It is alfo to 
be remembered, that, on the prefent plan of pur- 
fuing thefe diverfions, fuch a regard is had to 
the circumftances and fituation of animals, that 
no helplefs, feeble progeny is left to bewail the 
lofs of an affectionate parent; or, from the want 
of its providence and protection, to perifh from 
expofure to rapacious animals, or the more 
cruel attacks of want and famine. The fate 
of an individual may, therefore, be confidered as 
unconnected with that of any of its fpecies ; and 
if it be allowed, that an untimely period of its 
exiftence is not to it any evil, the mode of its 

fufFering 



350 On Hunting, Shooting, &c. 

iuffering death, will not only be no objection to 
the diverfions we fpeak of, but will furnilh rea- 
fons of confiderable weight in their favour. 

The tie of natural affection, it hath already 
been obferved, is not weak amongft brute ani- 
mals j but it may be remarked, that though in 
many cafes it is fo ftrong in parents towards 
their progeny, the reflected attachment feems to 
fubfift, only whilft the young offspring are in- 
capable of providing for themfelves. When 
they attain to maturity, the connection is, in mod 
cafes, diffolved, and the relationfhip forgotten. 
How pitiable then mud be the Situation of that 
animal, whom age, with its attendants, weaknefs 
and difeafe, hath reduced to a feeble and help- 
lefs ftate, incapable of providing for itfelf the 
neceffary fubfiflence, a prey to continual appre- 
henfion from thofe animals whofe attacks it is 
unable to fly from or repel ; and at length lan- 
guishing to the period of its exiftence, confumed 
by famine and wafted by difeafe ? Compare with 
the fate of fuch an animal, that of the timid 
hare. She meets the opening morn in health 
and vigour, and with playful frolic wantons on 
yon upland hill, enlivened by the beams of the 
rifingfun. No feeble pulfe, or languid eye, in- 
dicate a dilbrdered frame ; no anticipation of her 
approaching fate infpires her with apprehenfion. 
All is g?y and lively, like the profpect around 
her- On a iudden, however, the fcene is changed, 

the 



On Hunting, Shooting, &V. 351 

the echoing of the horn refounds from the adja- 
cent valley, and the cry of, the deep-mouthed 
hounds thunders towards the hills. She becomes 
motionlefs with fear, when a fecond alarm roufes 
her from her trance j fhe flies, and with eager 
fleps feems to outftrip the winds. Men, horfes, 
and dogs inftantly join in the chace, and the 
foreft echoes to the wild uproar. The hare 
doubles — the fwiftnefs of her fpeed abates — fear, 
more than fatfgue, retards her flight — fhe faints 
at the noife of the approaching hounds — re- 
doubles to elude their purfuit — her feeble limbs 
are unable to perform their office — and now — > 
breathlefs and exhaufted, fhe is overtaken, and 
torn in pieces by her mercilefs purfuers. 

Such a doom feems fevere, and hard is the 
heart which doth not commiferate the fufferer. Its 
apparent feverity will, however, be much miti- 
gated, if we confider the quick tranficion, from 
perfect health to the expiring conflict. Death, 
brought on by difeafe, or the decay of nature, 
would be much more to be dreaded ; and com, 
pared therewith, the fate of the partridge from 
the gun of the fowler, or of the trout by the rod 
of the angler, is mild and enviable. 

To recapitulate then what hath been advanced 
on this fubject — We have feen the human mind, 
in every age, endowed with a ftrong, natural in- 
clination to thefe diverfions. In the favage 
ftate, we have feen, that the fituation of man 

render* 



352 On Hunting, Shooting, &c. 

renders fuch a propenfity abfolutely neceffary $ 
we have feen it become, at once conducive to 
his convenience, and his pleafures ; we behold 
him emerge, from a (late of uncivilization, into 
polifhed life. This propenfity flill accompanies 
him ; it ftimulates him to exercife the efficient 
caufe of health j it infpires him with a love of 
induftry and activity, the certain fource of true 
pleafure; he becomes habituated to fatigue and 
exertion, defpifes danger and difficulty, nor 
dreads expofure to thofe elements, from whofe 
feverity he acquires ftrength of body, with vigor 
and firmnefs of mind. We have feen, with re- 
fpect to brute animals, thar, being deftined for 
the ufe of man, in depriving them of exiftence, 
he difturbs not the order and intention of nature} 
that, in facrificing them to his pleafures, he nei- 
ther deftroys nor diminifhes their portion of 
enjoyment ; and that, in exercifing the preroga- 
tive with which he is inverted, if he were not 
thus prompted by inclination, he would be com- 
pelled by neceffity. 

It may be urged, if not as an argument in 
favour of thefe diverfions, yet as a circumftance 
which fhould incline us to caution in condemning 
them, that they are purfued by many indivi- 
duals, who are diftinguifhed for thofe virtues 
of the heart} which feem totally inconfiftent with 
thoughtlefs or with intentional cruelty ; and 

which 






On Hunting, Shooting, &c. 353 

which are at once the ornament and the bleflings 
of fociety. 

The Patriot, or the Citizen, who, anxious for 
the good of his country, and of mankind, bends 
all his thoughts and all his faculties to the pro- 
motion of the public weal ; who facrifices the 
comforts of eafe and of repofe, foregoes the fweets 
of domeftic blifs, nor is with-heid by the charms 
of focial converfe, when his exertions can tend 
to relieve the unfortunate from the burden 
of affliction, and to enliven the face of forrow 
with fmiles of joy j will yet, when leifure, from 
thefe more noble occupations permits, join in 
the pleafures of the chafe — arreft the pheafant 
in his aerial flight — or enfnare the inhabitants 
of the dimpled lake. And furely the heart, 
that makes " all human weal and woe its own," 
cannot reioice in acts of inhumanity — Surely 
the generous paffions of philanthrophy and - bene- 
volence, can never infpire or accompany a cruel 
deed ! 

It would exceed the limits of this Efiay, to 
take a comprehenfive view of the human mind, 
which yet is not unnecefiaiy in the investigation 
of this fubjeft. It might then, perhaps, appear, 
that amidft all the variety and eccentricity, which 
the contemplation of a given character prefents, 
the primary difpofuions, the original motives, 
and fprings of action, are extremely few. If 

Vol. I. A a this 



354 ® n Haling, Shooting, i^c. 

this were proved, the Teeming inconfiftency 
between many of the actions of an individual 
muft difappear; as it would be unfair to reafon 
from any partial view of his character. 

Perhaps the difpofuions, which incline us to 
thefe diverfions, are the fame which, under 
other circumftances, incite to the moil heroic 
actions. The courage gained in the field, may 
be exerted to reftrain the infolence or ambition" 
of a tyrant ; expofure to fatigue, and the 
inclemency of feafons, qualify us for thofc exer- 
tions which our ftations, as members of 
fociety may demand j and he who, fearkfs of 
danger, is emulous of diftin&ion in the chafe, 
may equally pant for glory, when the invafion of 
his country prompts him to repel her foes. 

We may further obferve, that if Nature, 
with a liberal, but not lavifh hand, hath beftowed 
on all her offspring, thofe powers and propen- 
fities only, which their own necefikies, or the 
general order and ceconomy of the fyftem 
require, we (hall be unable to difcover her 
intention in the gifts of fcent to the hound, 
fwiftnefs to the grey-hound, and fagacity to the 
pointer ; thefe being amongft the number of 
innate inftinctive faculties, which can only be 
exercifed in fome of the diverfions we fpeak of r 
and for which purpofes, we may therefore 
reafonaoly prefume they were given. 

Upon 



Dr. Fothergill on Longevity. 255 

Upon the whole, may we not then conclude, 
that man, by co-operating with fueh animals, 
employs both his and their faculties on the 
purpofes for which they were partially defigned : 
thus tending to complete the bounteous fcheme 
of Providence ; the happinefs and well-being of 
all its creatures ? 



Observations on Longevity. By Anthony 
Fothergill, M. D. F. R. S. Communicated 
in a Letter to Dr, Percival. Read January 1 5, 
1783. 

DEAR SIR, 

I HAVE often thought, it would be an ufeful 
undertaking to collect into one point of view, 
the memorable instances of long-lived perfons, 
whofe ages are recorded by monumental infcrip- 
tions, biographical writings, or even by the 
public prints. The only judicious attempt I 
have yet feen of this kind, was by the ingenious 
Mr. tVhitehurJi, a few years ago, in his Inquiry 
into the Origin and Formation of the Earth. 
To the examples of longevity mentioned by him, 
as collected by a perfon of veracity from the 

A a 2 above 



o$6 Dr. V other gill on Longevity. 

above fources, I have now added fundi y remark- 
able inftances of a fimilar kind, as they have 
occurred to me in the courfe of reading; and 
have annexed the authorities, (fo far as was 
practicable) that you may be enabled to judge 
of the decree of credibility, that may feem due 
to the refpective facts, and of the allowance 
which it may appear neceffary to make, for thac 
natural propenfity, which mankind have ever 
betrayed for the marvellous. Now, admitting 
that many of the ages may have been fomewhat 
exaggerated, yet Mill there can be no poffible 
doubt, that even thefe have extended far beyond 
the ordinary period of life, and may therefore 
be entitled to a place in the following tables, 
which I fubmit to your confideration, as a fmall 
fpecimen of what might be more worthy your 
attention, if conducted hereafter on a larger 
fcale, and puifued with chronological accuracy. 



table 



Dr. Fothergill on Longevity, 

TABLE I. 

OF LONGEVITY. 



357 



Names of the Perfons. 



Thomas Parre 

Henry Jenkins 

Robert Montgomery 
James S .nds 
His Wife 
Countefs of Defmond 

Ecleflon 

J. Sa.ar 

- - Laurence 

Simon Sack 

Ccl. Thomas Winflow 

Francis Confift 

C'nrift. J. Drakenberg 

M rgaret Forfter 

her Daughter 

Francis Bnns 
John Bio key 
Jjni.s Bowels 
John Tice 
John Mount 
A. GoWmi'.h, 
Mary Yaes 
John Balis 
William Ellis 
L-iuilij Truxo, a Ne- 
grefs in S. Ameika 
Margaret Patten 
J met Taylar 
Richard Lloyd 

Sufannah Hilliar 

James Hiyley 

Ann Cockbolt 



Ages! Places of Abode. 



15a 

169 

116 

140 

120 
'i 40 

*45 
112 
14c 
141 

146 
150 
146 
136 

104 
12 

»34 

'5 

125 

136 

J 40 
128 

126 
130 

*75 

13 l 

108. 

J 33' 



112 



Shropshire 

Yorkshire 

Dilto 

Stafford/hire 

Ditto 

Ireland 

Ditto 

Lancafhire 

Scotland 

Trionia 

Ireland 

York/hire 

Norway 

Cumberland 

Ditto 

France 

Devon/hire 

Killingworth 

Worceflerlhire 

Scotland 

Frajicet 

Shroplhire 

Northampton, 

Live pool 

Tucuman, S. America 

Lockneugh nearPaifley 
Fintrjy, Scotland 
Al jntgomery 
Piddingion, North- 

amptonfhire 
Middlewkh, Chefhire 
Stoke-Bruerne, North- 

amptonlhire 



Living or Dead. 



} 



Died Nov 16, 1635 

Phil Tranf No. 44, 
Died Dec. 8, 1670 

Phil. Tranf. No. 221 
Di d in - 1670. 
Do. Fuller's Wort. iies> 
p. 47. 

Rawleigh's Hift.p. 166. 
Died - - 1 6c 1 (k) 
- - 1608 (b) 
Living - - ( C J 
Died May 30, 1764 

Aug. 26, 1766 

— — Jan. - 1763 
June 24, l77of<y 

> Both living 1771 

Died Feb. 6, 1760 
Living - - jyyyfe) 
Died Aug. 15, l6$6(JJ 

March 17:4^; 

Feb. 27, \T)d(b) 

June 1776 (i) 

¦ - iiiHk) 

April 5, 1706 (I) 

Aug. 16, i;8o(»;) 

Living Oft. 5, i 7 8 (») 

Lynche'sGuidetoHealth 
Died Oft. 10, 1780 
Lynche'sGuidetoHealth 
Died Feb. 19, 178, ( ) 

March 17, 17S i(^) 

April 5 , 1775 ( f ) 



Wt'lhm WJker, aged 112, not men 
Battle of 
(a) Fuller't Worthies, p. J40 
(£) Phil. Tranf, abridged by Lowthorp, 

vol. III. p. 306. 
(c) Derbam* Phyftc . Theulcgy, p. 173. 
(J) Annual Regifter. 
(e) Daily Adveitifcr, Nov. i3, 1777. 
If) W rwickfhire. 
(g) Daily Advertifer, Alircli 1774. 
(A) Morning Poft, Feb. 29, 1 
\i) Daily Advenifer, June 24, 1776. ' 

A 



tioned above, who was a Soldier at the 
Edge-Hill. 

(i) Ibidem, Aug. 22, 1776, 
(/) See Infcriprion in the Portico of All- 
Saints Church. 
(m) London Even. Port, Aug. 42, 1780. 
(n) Liiidon Chronicle, Oft. 5, 1730. 
{0) North. Mercury, Feb. 19, 1781. 
(/>) Gen. Even. Poll, March 24, 1781. 
(q) Well known to Perfons of Credit at 
Northampton. 

a 3 If 



358 Dr. F other gill on Longevity. 

If we look back to an early period of the 
chriftian asra, we (hall find that Italy has been, 
at lead about that time peculiarly propitious 
to longevity. Lord Bacon obferves, that the 
year of our Lord 76, in the reign of Fefpajian, 
was memorable ; for in that year was a taxing, 
which afforded the mod authentic method of 
knowing the ages of men. From it, there were 
found in that part of Italy, lying between the 
ylfpenine mountains, and the river Po, one 
hundred and twenty four perfons who either 
equalled, or exceeded one hundred years of 
age, namely: 



TABLE 



IL 



54 Perfons of 100 Years each. 





57 


- 




of 


no 






2 


- 


- 


of 


,2 5 






4 


- 


- 


of 


130 






4 


- 


- 


of 


136 






3 


- 


- 


of 


140 




In Parma 


3 


- 


- 


of 


120 


Years each. 




2 


- 


- 


of 


130 




In Brujfels 


1 


- 


- 


of 


12 S 




In Placentia 


1 


- 


- 


of 


'3 1 




In Faventia 


1 


- 


- 


of 


132 






6 


- 


- 


of 


110 






4 


- 


- 


of 


120 




In Rimino 


1 


- 


- 


of 


150 


Years, viz. Marcus 
Aponius. 



Mr. 






Dr. Fothergill on Longevity. 359 

Mr. Carew, in his furvey of Cornwall, affures 
us, that it is no unufual thing, with the inhabit- 
ants of that county, to reach ninety years of age 
and upwards, and even to retain their ftrength 
of body, and perfect ufe of their fenfes. Befides 
Brown, the Cornifh beggar, who lived to one 
hundred and twenty, and one Polezew to one 
hundred and thirty years of age, he remembered 
the deceafe of' four perfons in his own parifh, the 
fum of whofe years, taken collectively, amounted 
to three hundred and forty. Now, although 
longevity evidently prevails more in certain 
di drifts than in others, yet it is, by no means, 
confined to any particular nation or climate 5 
nor are there wanting inflances of it, in almoft 
every quarter of the globe, as appears from the 
preceding, as well as the fubfequent table. 



Aa4 TABLE 



360 



Dr. Fothergill on Longevity. 



TABLE III. 
OF LONGEVITY. 



Names of the Perfons. 'Age. Places of Abode. 



Hippocrater, Phyfician, 
Democritus, Philofopher 
Galen, Phyfician 
Albuna Marc 

Dumitur Raduly 

Titus Fullonius 

Abraham Paiba 

L. Tertulla 

Lewis Coronaro 

Robert Blakeney, Efq. 

Margaret Scott 

W. Gulftone 

J. Bright 

William PofUll 

Jane Reeves 

W. Paulet, Marquis of 

Winche ler 
John Wilfon 

Patrick Wian 

M. Laurence 

Evan- Williams 



1 04 
109 
140 
150 

140 

150 

142 

»37 
100 

114 

140 
105 
120 
103 

106 

116 

"5 
140 

HS 



lfland of Cos 
Abdera 
Pergamus 
Ethiopia 
Haromfzeck Trail 

filvania 
Bononia 
Charles town, South 

Carolina 
Aiminium 

Venice 

Armagh, Ireland 

Dalkeith, Scotland 

Ireland 
Ludlow 
France 
Efi'ex 

Hampshire 

Suffolk 

Lcfbury, Northum- 
berland 

Orc'ades 

Carmarthen Work 
houfe, ftill alive 



Where recorded. 

LyncheonHealth,Chap.3. 
Bacon's Hiflory, IP95. 
Voff. Inft. or Lib. 3. 
-> a ke well's ap. Lib. I. 
Bi-sd Jan. 18, 17S2. Gen. 
Gazetteer, April 18th. 
Fulgofus, Lib. 8. 

General Gazetteer. 

Fulgofus, Lib. 3. 
Bacon's Hilt . of Life, &e. 

P- 134- 
General Gazetteer. 
See Infcrip. on her Tomb 

in Dalkeith Ch. Yard. 
Fuller's Worthies. 
Lynche on Health. 
Bacon's Hift. p 134. 
St.J.Chron,Junei4,i78r. 

Baker's Chron. p. 502. 

Gen. Gaz Oft. 29, 1782. 
Plempius Fundammed, 

Seel. 4, Chap, 8. 
Buchanan's Hift. of Scot. 
Gen. Gazetteer, Oct. 12, 

1782. 



The Antidiluvians are purpofely omitted, as 
bearing too little reference to the prefent race 
of mortals, to afford any fatisfa&ory conclufions; 
and the improbable ftories of fome perfons, 
who have almoft rivalled them in modern times, 
border too much upon the marvellous, to find 
a place in thefe tables. The prefent examples 
are abundantly fufficient to prove, that longevity 
dpes not depend fo much, as has been fuppofed, 

on 



Dr. Fotbergill on Longevity. 36 1 

en any particular climate, fituation, or occu- 
pation in life. For we fee, that it often prevails 
in places, where all thefe are extremely dif- 
fimilar; and it would, moreover, be very 
difficult, in the hiftories of the feveral perfons 
above-mentioned, to find zny circumftance 
common to them all, except, perhaps that 
of being born of healthy parents, and of bein^ 
inured to - daily labour, temperance, and 
fimplicity of diet. Among the inferior ranks 
of mankind, therefore, rather than arnonga 
the fons of eafe and luxury, (hall we find die 
moft numerous instances of longevity ; even 
frequently, when other external circumftances 
feem extremely unfavourable : as in the cafe of 
the poor fexton at Peterborough, who, notwitji, 
(landing his unpromifirig occupation among dead 
bodies, lived long enough to bury two crowned 
heads, and to furvive two complete generations.* 
The livelihood of Henry Jenkins, and old Parr, is 
faid to have confided chiefly of the coarfeft fare 
as they depended on precarious alms. To 
which may be added, the remarkable inftance of 
4gnes Milbume, who, after bringing forth a 
numerous offspring, and being obliged, through 
extreme indigence, to pafs the latter part of her 
jife in St. Luke's work-houfc, yet reached her 

* Fuller's Worthies, p. 293, from a Memorial in the 
Cathedral at Peterborough. 

huqdred ch 



$6 2 Dr. Father gill on Longevity. 

hundredth and fixth year, in that fordid, unfriendly 
Jkuation.* The plain diet, and invigorating 
employments of a country life, are acknowledged, 
on all hands, to be highly conducive to health 
and longevity, while the luxury and refinements 
of large cities are allowed to be equally deftruc- 
tive to the human fpecies : and this consideration 
alone, perhaps, more than counterbalances all 
the boafted privileges, of fuperior elegance and 
civilization, refulting from a city life. 

From country villages, and not from crouded 
cities, have the preceding inftances of longevity 
been chiefly funplied. Accordingly it appears, 
from the London bills of Mortality, during a 
period of thirty years, viz. from the' year 1728 
to 1758, the fum of the deaths amounted to 
750,322, and that, in all this prodigious 
number, only two hundred and forty two 
perfons furvived the hundredth year of their age! 
This overgrown metropolis is computed, by my 
learned friend Dr. Price, to contain a ninth part 
of the inhabitants of England, and to confume 
annually, feven thoufand perfons, who remove 
into it from the country every year, without 
increafing it. He moreover obferves, that the 
number of inhabitants, in England and Wales, 
has diminished about one fourth part fince 
fhe revolution, and fo rapidly of late, that, 

• Lvncbeh Guide to Health, C. IIJ. 



Dr. Fcthergill on Longevity. 363 

in eleven years, near 200,000 of our common 
people have been loft!* If the calculation be 
juftj however alarming it may appear in a 
national view, there is this confolation, when 
confidered in a philofophical light, that without 
partial evil, there can be no general good ; and 
that, what a nation lofes in the fcale of popu- 
lation at one period, it gains at another; and 
thus, probably, the average number of inhabit- 
ants, on the surface of the globe, continues, at all 
times, nearly the fame. By this medium, the 
world is neither overstocked with inhabitants, 
nor kept too thin, but life and death keep a 
tolerably equal pace. The inhabitants of this 
ifland, comparatively fpeaking, are but as the 
dust of the balance j yet, instead of being di- 
minifhed, we are affured by other writers, that 
within thefe thirty years, they are greatlv in- 
creafed. j- 

The defire of felf-prefervation, and of pro- 
tracting the fhort fpan of life, is fo intimately 
interwoven with our constitution, that it is 
justly esteemed one of the firft principles of 
our nature, and, in fpite even of pain and mifery, 
feldom quits us to the last moments of our 
existence. It feems, therefore, to be no ]efs 
our duty, than our interest, to examine minutely 

* Obfervations on Population, &c. p. 30$. 

\ The Rev, Mr. Hewitt t Mr. Walts, and others. 

into 



364 Br. Fothergill on Longevity. 

into the various means, that have been con- 
fidered as conducive to health and long life ; 
and, if poffible, to diftinguifh fuch circumftances 
as are effential to that great end, from thofe 
¦which are merely accidental. But here, it is 
much to be regretted, that an accurate hiftory 
of the lives of all the remarkable peifons, in the 
above table, fo far as relates to the diet, regimen, 
and the ufe of the non-naturals, has not been 
faithfully handed down to us ; without which, 
it is impofTible to draw the neceffary inferences. 
Is it not then a matter of aftonifhment, that 
hiftorians and philofophers have hitherto paid 
fo little attention to longevity ? If the prefenc 
imperfect lift mould excite others, of more 
leifure and better abilities, to undertake a full 
inveftigation of fo interefting a fubjeel, the 
enquiry might prove not only curious, but 
highly ufeful to mankind, in order to furnifh 
materials for a future hiltory of longevity, the 
bills of mortality, throughout the kingdom, 
ought firfb to be revifed, and put on a better foot- 
ing ; agreeably to the fcheme which you point- 
ed out fome time ago, and of which Mancheder 
and Chefter, have already given a fpecimen, 
highly worthy of imitation. The plan, however, 
might be further improved, with very little 
trouble, by adding a particular account of the 
diet and regimen -of every perfon, who dies at 
eighty years of age, or upwards j and mentio,.- 



in S, 



Br. Fothergill on Longevity. 36$ 

ing, whether his parents were healthy, long-lived 
people, &c. &c. An accurate regifter, thus 
eftablifhed throughout the Brktjh dominions, 
would be productive of many important advan- 
tages to fociety, not only in a medical, and 
philofophical, but alfo in a political and moral 
view. It is therefore to be hoped, that the 
legiflature will not long delay taking an object, 
of fuch great utility, into their ferious con- 
fideration. 

All the circumftances, that are mod effentially 
neceffary to life, may be comprized under the 
fix following; heads. 



1. Air and climate. 

2. Meat and drink. 

3. Motion and reft. 



4. The fecretions and excretions. 

5. Sleep and watching. 

6. Affections of the mind. 



Thefe, though all perfectly natural to the 
constitution, have by writers, been flyled the 
non-naturals, by a ftrange perverfion of lan- 
guage -, and have been all copioufly handled 
under that improper term. However, it may 
not be amifs, to offer a few fhort obfervations 
en each, as they are fo immediately connected 
with the prefent fubject. 

1. Air, &c. It has long been known, that 
frefb air is more immediately neceffary to life 
than food ; for a man may live two or three 
days without the latter, but not many minutes 
without the former. The vivifying principle 

contained 



36*6 Dr. F other gill en Longevity. 

contained in the atmofphere, fo efTential to 
the fupport of flame, as well as animal life, 
concerning which, authors have propofed fo 
many conjectures, appears now to be nothing 
elfe but that pure dephlogiiricated fluid lately 
difcovered by that ingenious phiioibpher, Dr. 
Priejlley. The common atmofphere may well 
be fuppofed to be more or lefs healthy in pro- 
portion, as it abounds with this animating 
principle. As this exhales, in copious dreams, 
from the green leaves of all kinds of vegetables, 
even from thole of the moft poifonous kind, 
may we not, in fome meafure, account why 
inftances of longevity are fo much more frequent 
in the country, than in great cities-, where the 
air, inftead of partaking fo largely of this 
falutary impregnation, is daily contaminated 
with noxious animal effluvia, and phlogifton ? 

With refpecl: to climate, various obfervations 
confpire to prove, that thofe regions, which 
lie within the temperate zones, are beft calcu- 
lated to promote long life. Hence, perhaps, 
may be explained, why Italy has produced fo 
many long livers, and why Jflands in general 
are more falutary than Continents -, of which 
Bermudas, and fome others, afford examples. 
And it is a pleafing circumftance, that our 
own Ifland, appears from the above table, 
(notwithstanding the fudden vicifiltudes to 
which it is liable,) to contain far more inftances 

of 



Dr. F other gill on Longevity. ^Sy 

of longevity than could well be imagined. The 
ingenious Mr. Wbitiburft, azures us, from 
certain fads, that Englifhmen. are, in general 
longer lived than North Americans j and, 
that a Britifh conflitution will laft longer 
even in that climate, than a native one.* But 
it muft be allowed in general, that the human 
conftitution is adapted to the peculiar Mate 
and temperature, of each refpeiflive climate, 
fo that no part of the habitable globe can be 
pronounced too hot, or too cold, for its in- 
habitants. Yet, in order to promote a friendly 
intercourfe between the moft remote regions, 
the Author of Nature has wifely enabled the 
inhabitants to endure great and fuprizinc- 
changes of temperature with impunity, f 

2. Foods and drink. Though foods and 
drink, of the moft fimple kinds, are allowed 
to be the beft calculated for fupportino- the 
body in health, yet it can hardly be doubted, 
but variety may be fafely indulged occafionally' 
provided men would reftrain their appetites 
within the bounds of temperance. For boun- 
tiful nature cannot be fuppofed to have poured' 
forth fuch a rich profufion of provifions, merely 

* Enquiry into the Original State, and Formation of 
the Earth. 

f Sec remarkable inftances of this, in the Account of 
Experiments in a heated room, by Dr. George fortye, and 
others. 

Phi.!. Tranf. vol. LXIX. 

to 



368 Dr. Fothergill on Longevity. 

to tantalize the human fpecies, without attribut- 
ing to her the part of a cruel ftep-dame, inftead 
of that of the kind and indulgent parent. Befides, 
we find, that by the wonderful powers of the 
digeftive organs, a variety of animal and 
vegetable fubltances, of very difcordant prin- 
ciples, are happily afiimilated into one bland 
homogeneous chyle; therefore, it fcems natural 
to diftruft thofe cynical writers, who would 
rigidly confine mankind to one fimple di(h, and 
their drink to the mere water of the brook. 
Nature, it is true, has pointed out that mild, • 
infipid fluid, as the univerfal diluent ; and, there- 
fore, moft admirably adapted for our daily 
beverage. But experience has equally proved, 
that vinous, and fpiritous liquors, on certain 
occafions, are no lefs falutary and beneficial, 
whether it be to fupport ftrength againft fick- 
nefs, or bodily fatigue, or to exhilerate the mind 
under the preflure of heavy misfortunes. But 
alas ! what Nature meant for innocent and ufeful 
cordials, to be ufed only occafionally, and 
according to the direction of reafon ; cuftom 
and caprice, have, by degrees, rendered habitual 
to the human frame, and liable to the mod 
enormous and destructive abufes ? Hence, it 
may be juftly doubted, whether gluttony and 
intemperance, have not depopulated the world, 
more than even fword, peftilence, and famine. 
True, therefore, is the old maxim, " Modus 

utendi 



Dr. F other gill on Longevity. 3 69 

utendi ex veneno facit Medicamentum, ex Medi- 



camento, venenum." 



3. and 4. Motion and reft, fleep and watching. 
It is allowed on all hands, that alternate motion 
and reft, and fleep and watching, are necefiary 
conditions to health and longevity ; and that 
they ought to be adapted to age, temperament, 
conftitution, temperature of the climate, &c. 
but the errors which mankind daily commit, 
in thefe refpects, become a fruitful fource of 
difeafes. While fome are bloated and relaxed 
with eafe and indolence, others are emaciated, 
and become rigid, through hard labour, watch- 
ing, and fatigue. 

5. Secretions and execretions. Where the 
animal functions are duly performed, the fecre- 
tions go on regularly ; and the different evacua- 
tions fo exa&ly correfpond to the quantity of 
aliment taken in, in a given time, that the body 
is found to return daily to nearly the fame weight. 
If any particular evacuation happen to be pre- 
ternaturally diminifhed, fome other evacuation is 
proportionally augmented, and the equilibrium 
is commonly preierved ; but continued irregula- 
rities, in thefe important functions, cannot but 
terminate in difeafe. 

6. Affections of the mind. The due regula- 
tion of the paftions, perhaps, contributes more 
to health and longevity, than that of any 

Vol. I. B b other 



370 Br. F other gill on Longevity. 

other of the non-naturals. The animating paf- 
fions, fuch as joy, hope, love, &c. when kept 
within proper bounds, gently excite the nervous 
influence, promote an equable circulation, and 
are highly conducive to health -, while the 
deprefTmg affeftions, fuch as fear, grief, and 
defpair, produce the contrary effecl:, and lay the 
foundation of the moft formidable difeafcs. 

From the light which hiftory affords us, as 
well as from fome inftances in the above table, 
there is great reafon to believe, that longevity 
is, in a great meafure, hereditary; and that 
healthy, long-lived parents would commonly 
tranfmit the fame to their children, were it not 
for the frequent errors in the non-naturals, which 
fo evidently tend to the abbreviation of human 
life. 

Whence is it, but from thefe caufes, and the 
unnatural modes of living, that, of all the chil- 
dren which are born in the capital cities of Europe, 
nearly one half die in early infancy ? To 
what elfe can we attribute this extraordinary 
mortality ? Such an amazing proportion of 
premature deaths is a circumftance unheard of, 
among favage nations, or among the young of 
other animals I In the earlied ages, we are 
informed, that human life was protracted to a 
very extraordinary length ; yet how few perfons, 
in thefe later times, arrive at that period, which 

nature 



Dr. Fothergiil on Longevity. 37 1 

nature feems to have defigned ! Man is, by 
nature, afield-animal, and feems deftined to rife 
with the fun, and to fpend a large portion of 
his time in the open air, to inure his body to 
robuft exercjfes, and the inclemency of the 
feafons, and to make a plain homely repaft, 
only when hunger dictates. But art has ftudi- 
oufly defeased the kind intentions of nature ; 
and by enflaving him to all the blandifhments 
of fenfe, has left him, alas ! an eafy viftirn to 
folly and caprice ! To enumerate the various 
abufes, which take place from the earlieft in- 
fancy, and which are continued through the 
fucceeding ftages of modifh life, would carry 
me far beyond my prefent intention. Suffice it 
to obferve, that they prevail more particularly 
among people, who are the moft highly polifhed 
and refined. To compare their artificial mode 
of life, with that of nature, or even with the 
long livers in the lift, would, probably, afford 
a very ftriking contraft ; and, at the fame time, 
fupply an additional reafon, why, in very large 
cities, inftances of longevity are fo very rare. 
Of late years, the increafing luxury and diflipa- 
tion of the age, no longer confined to the 
metropolis, have fpread their contagion far 
and wide into the country, fo as to afford the 
fage divine, and fpeculative moralift, a more 
melancholy profpeft of the apparent degeneracy 

B b 2 of 



372 Dr. Fothergill on Longevity- 

of the human race, than, perhaps, was ever 
before exhibited !* 

That fo complicated a machine, as the human 
body, fo delicate in its texture, and fo exquifitely 
formed in all its parts, fhould continue, for fo 
many years to perform its various functions, 
even under the mod prudent conduct, is not a 
little furprifing: but that it fhould ever hold 
out to any advanced period, under all the rude 
fhocks it fo often meets with from riot and 
intemperance, which lay it open to all the 
various " ills that flefh is heir to," is Mill more 
truly miraculous ! But here, perhaps, it may 
be alledged, that it never can be fuppofed, all 
the long livers purfued one uniform, regular 
courfe of life, fince it is well known, that fome 
of the moft noted ones were fometimes guilty 
of great deviations from ftricl: temperance and 
regularity. Let not this, however, encourage 
the giddy libertines, of the prefcnt age, to hope 
to render their continued fcenes of intemperance 

* I fay apparently, becaufe mankind, in reality, have 
been equally prone to vice and folly in all ages ; only thefe 
have affumed different appearances, according to the tafte 
and manners of the times : not that the human heart has 
been fucceflively growing more and more depraved, as the 
Poet fatyrically exclaims, 

./Etas parentum, pejor avis, tulit 

Nos nequiores ; mox daturos 

Projreniem vitiofiorem ! Hor. Lib. III. Ode 6. 

and 



Dr. V other gill on "Longevity. 373 

and debauchery, compatible with health and 
longevity. The duties and occupations of life, 
will not, indeed, permit the generality of man- 
kind to live by rule, and fubjecl: themfelves to 
a precife regimen. Fortunately, this is not 
neceffary : for, the divine Architect, has, with 
infinite wifdom, rendered the human frame fo 
ductile, as to admit of a very considerable 
latitude of health; yet this has its bounds, which 
none can long tranfgrefs with impunity. For, 
if old Parr, notwithftanding fome exceffes, 
and irregularities, arrived at fo aftonifhing an 
age, yet we have reafon to fuppofe, that thefe 
were far from being habitual ; and may alfo 
conclude, that had it not been for thefe abufes, 
his life might have been ftill considerably pro- 
traded. 

On the whole, though forne few exceptions 
may occur, to what has been already advanced, 
yet, it will be found, in general, that all extremes 
are unfriendly to health and longevity. Excef- 
five heat enervates the body ; extreme cold 
renders it torpid : floth and inactivity clog 
the neceffary movements of the machine; in- 
ceffant labour foon wears it out. On the other 
hand, a temperate climate, moderate exercife, 
pure country air, and ftiift temperance, together 
with a prudent regulation of the pafilons, will 
prove the moft efficacious means of protracting 
Jife to its utmoft limits. Now, if any of thefe 

B b 3 require 



374 ^)r. Fcthergill on Longevity. 

require more peculiar attention than the reft, 
it is, undoubtedly, the la ft : for the focial paffions, 
like gentle gales, fan the brittle veffel calmly 
along the ocean of life, while, on the other hand, 
rough, turbulent ones daih it upon rocks and 
quickfands. Hence, perhaps, it may be ex- 
plained, why the cultivation of philofophy, 
mufic, and the fine arts, all which manifestly 
tend to humanize the foul, and to calm the 
rougher paffions, are fo highly conducive to 
longevity. And, finally, why there is no fure 
method of fecuring that habitual calmnefs and 
ferenity of mind, which conftitute true happi- 
nefs, and which are, at the fame time, fo efTential 
to health and long life, without virtue. 

" ^quanimitas fola, atque unicaf elicit as." 

I hope you will excufe the prolixity of this 
letter, and believe me to be, with the higheft 
efteem, 

Dear Sir, 

Your fincere Friend 

and faithful humble Servant, 

A. FOTHERGILL. 

London, Nov, 23, 1782. 

On 



Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, &c. 37$ 



On the Influence of the Imagination, and 
the Passions, upon the Understanding. By 
the Rev. Thomas Barnes, D. D. Read 
Feb. 12, 1783. 

A SENTIMENT was advanced in con- 
•* *¦ verfatibn fcveral evenings ago, in this place, 
which, to fome Gentlemen, appeared flrange, 
or rather, falfe. The refpect I owe to this 
Society and above all, to Truth, obliges me 
to endeavour to defend a point, which appears 
to me, to be, not only juft, but very important. 

In the converfation before alluded to, it had 
been aflfcrted, Cf That an energy, imparted to 
" one power of the human mind, will often com- 
tf municate a degree of energy to the reft, and 
" thus affifl: and quicken their operation." 

In proof of this, it was maintained, "That 
" in many cafes, the vigour of imagination will 
" give correfpondent vigour to the judgment," 
and " That a degree of warmth and sensibility, 
,c will be greatly favourable to the clearnefi, as 
" well as to the celerity, of the perceptions of the 
M understanding." 

This fentiment will, probably, alarm thofe 
who have implicitly received what is fo generally 
aflcrted, " That pure and fimple truth has nothing 

B b 4 "to 



cc 



<( 



tc 



(C 



376 Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, 

tf to do with imagination, feelings, or pafTions ; 

and, that he will bid the faireft for fuccefsful 

inquiry into any fubject, who can diveft his 
<c mind mod entirely of all affections, and bring 

it into a ftate of abfolute indifference, and 

apathy." 

It is not uncommon, to hear the Imagination 
condemned as a criminal of the moft dangerous 
nature, whofe province is, at the beft, only to 
amufe, who is a fworn enemy to truth, and 
whom Reafon wifhes to banifh as far as poflible 
from her throne. How often have we known, 
what was very dull, for want of fome feafonings 
of imagination, fuppofed to be, for that reafon, 
very deep? Whilft, on the other hand, what 
was enlivened by the animation of an active 
fancy, was cenfured, as flimfy, and irrational ? 
As if a brilliant imagination could not pofiibly 
become the companion, and affiftant of the 
pureft understanding ! — That it may, is the point 
which this paper attempts to prove. 

In fupporting this hypothefis, I beg leave 
to hazard a defcription of the human mind, 
which fome may not very readily admit. In 
judging of the mental powers, it does not 
appear to me philofophically juft, to defcribe 
the foul, as confiding of feveral diftinct and 
difcordant faculties, of which, fome are com- 
miffioned perpetually to oppofe and contradict 
the others. The proper idea of human nature 

feems 



andPqffionSy upon the TJnderfianding. 377 

feems to be, "That it is one uncompounded 
u essence, continually in motion, and receiving 
" different denominations, according to the 
" different modes and circumftances of its move- 
" ment." Inftead of confidering the under- 
standing, memory, paffions, and will, as dijltncl 
and oppofite powers, or, as unconnected tenants 
under the fame roof, would it not be more jufr, 
to confider them all as modes of the mind itself, 
and as each of them bearing the common nature 
and character of the whole united fpirit ? We 
fhould then confider, the mind itfelf as under- 
standing, the mind itfelf as judging, remembering, 
feeling, willing. And this idea would be exaftly 
confonant to many facls, and phenomena of 
human nature, which will be hereafter men- 
tioned. 

However the common reprefentation of human 
nature, as confiding of federal contending powers, 
may have been figuratively adopted, in order to 
folve fome appearances, fuch as, the experience 
of conflicling pafiions, or of oppofite tendencies in the 
foul, yet, it is not founded in philofophical 
truth, and, if not properly guarded, by being 
always confidered merely as a figure, it may 
lead to falfehood, and abfurdity. 

The full elucidation of all thefe pofitions, 
would fwell this paper to a length, far beyond 
the limits wifely appointed for our communi- 
cations, which, being intended only as a fubfi- 

diary 



37 S Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, 

diary to converfation, (hould rather contain 
bints, than a regular compofition of finifhed and 
artificial fentences. I may add, this fubject 
would have received its beji illuftrations and fup- 
port from morals, and religion. But, as thefe 
would lead me too much into a profeffional 
line, I (hall endeavour to draw the arguments 
from thofe lower fubjecls, of taste, criticism, 
and polite literature, by which it appears 
to me, to be unanfwerabiy fupported. 

The points we undertake to defend are thefe ; 
cc That the imagination and paffions may, within 
" proper limits, be of the utmoft fervice in 
* c orivins: ftreneth and clearnefs to the under- 
" Sanding. And, that this arifes, — from the 
<c nature, and office of the imagination,— and 
" from the principle before mentioned, that che 
" energy of one power may be communicated to 
" the reft, with the greatelt advantage." 

It is owing to the narrownefs of our faculties, 
that we do not comprehend the Julflance of the 
human mind. Of its operations, however, we 
can fpeak with certainty. 1 reprefenc it to my- 
felf, as one uniform and Jimple ejfence, liable to be 
moved or ajjecled by the various objects around it, 
cr, by the flow of ideas continually pafling 
before it — and, according to the ftate and 
temperament of the whole indhifible majs, judg- 
ing, feeling, willing, adting. Hence, it will 
follow, that it will judge, and feel, and act, not 

according 



and Pajfions, upon the Underftanding. 3 79 

-according to the impulfe of Jome diftintl and 
unconnected faculty, but according to the ftate and 
difpofition of the whole mind. 

And, is it not true in facl, that men do thus 
judge, and feel, and act •, not according to the 
movement of a fingle power ; but, according to 
the general character and complexion of the heart ? 
The poet has beautifully illuftrated and enforced 
this fentiment.' 

- "The difference is as great between 

" The optics feeing, as the objects feen. 

" All manners take a tinclure from our own ; 

" Or come difcoloured, through our pajfions (hewn. 

•* Or Fancy's beam enlarges, multiplies, 

" Contracts, inverts, and gives ten thoufand dyes." 

Pope. 

Do not all Politicians judge upon every article 
of news, according to their prepoiTeffions ? Is it 
not of equal importance, in education, to oi ve 
a proper bias to the heart, as to furnifh prober 
ideas for the head, in order to produce retiitude cf 
mind? Hence, the fanctity of error Hence, 
the different manner in which you judge of the 
fame actions, in a friend \ and in an enemy. Hence, 
all the advantages of manner, of oratory, of 
addrejs. And hence, all that fakination of the 
graces, upon which, if a noble author has faid 
true, fo much depends. In all thefe cafes, the 
underftanding acts, not as a fingle infulated 
principle, but as taking its tinge and impreffion, 

from 



380 Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, 

from the feelings, the imagination, and the 
heart. 

This fact will probably not be contefted. 
But it will be faid, tc That thefe paffions are the 
* c fources of all our errors, and that, if we could 
" entirely lay afide imagination and affection, 
" we fhould judge upon every fubject, more 
<f impartially, and therefore, more truly." 

Allowing, that truth is ever one and the fame, 
yet if, as the foregoing facts evince, the fame 
truth will appear very differently to different 
minds, and to the fame mind at different times; 
if the difpofition and frame of the mind be a 
kind of medium, through which the fame object 
fhall appear amazingly diverfified, mofl amiable 
to one, mofl: difgufting to another : Then, it 
fhould feem to follow, that what is mod defirable 
to a right judgment, is, not, that the mind be 
diverted of all its affections, that the imagination 
be laid afleep, and that the understanding alone 
be employed in the contemplation. To me, 
all this appears to be, neither neceffary, nor 
poflible. But, that the whole united mind, con- 
fidered as comprehending all its various powers, 
fhall be in a proper Jlate for the investigation and 
reception of truth, and, that the imagination and 
paffions fhall be of fuch a temperament, as tq 
affift the judgment in its determination. This is 
not a ftate of abfolute inaction; but of action 
fuiced to their proper nature and office, in 

fubordination. 



and Paffions\ upon the Underftanding. 3 9 1 

fubordination to the higher powers of reafoning 
and judgment. 

If the underftanding were that pure and Am- 
ple principle, which many reprefent it to be, 
entirely diftinct from all the palTions, and able 
to judge left of every truth, when mod feparate 
from their influence, we mould nor, furely, ob- 
ferve fo much diverfity of judgment, fuch ama-* 
zing variety of opinions, upon almoft every 
fubject of human life. Wherever it is poftible 
for human affections, interefts, or feelings to 
infinuate themfelves, we find a tinge of their 
nature, in the judgment. If we fuppofe the 
mind it/elf to judge, according to its nature and 
character, we mall immediately perceive, that 
its fentence muft be coloured and diverfified — 
that the judgment will fafhion itfelf to the ftate 
of the heart — and that, in almoft every inftance, 
a falfe tafte o'r feeling, will lead to falfe opinion, 
whether in poetry, painting, mufic, criticifm, 
oratory, or art in general. Is there not an 
almoft univerfal conformity between the feelings 
and the judgment ? Even vice itfelf, in the pa- 
roxyfms of temptation, for a moment, feduces 
the underftanding, and blinds the reafon. At 
that moment, the finner promifes himfelf im- 
punity, and enjoyment. Nor is it, till the temp- 
tation is paft, that the mind fees again the de- 
formity and danger of vicious conduct, 

But, 



382 Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, 

But, it will be afked, " Are not the pajions, then, 
the cavjes of our wrong judgments ?" Moft cer- 
tainly they are- Bur, upon the fame principle, 
that wrong pafiions lead to wrong judgments, 
right pafiions would lead to true. If the mind 
were properly affected, it would judge properly. 

But, let us inquire more particularly, into 
the nature and office of the Imagination — for thefe 
are, I perfuade myfelf, very commonly, and very 
greatly, miftaken. 

Imagination is that power, or more properly, 
that att of the mind, which afTembles, compounds, 
divides its ideas, not in the order in which they 
flrft came into the mind, for that is the province 
of memory, but, in any order, and upon any prin- 
ciples it choofes. It ranges abroad, through 
the immenfe magazine and repofitory of ideas, 
treafured up there, and joins together, or fepa- 
rates, at pleafure, ideas, qualities, and forms. 
It may be called, the fervant or labourer of the 
mind, continually employed, to bring before it, 
from its amazing ftorehoufe, materials, with 
which to build up its conclufions. It is the 
ever bufy, patient, indefatigable drudge, toiling 
for the common benefit and afiiftance of all the 
other powers ; and does not deferve the indig- 
nities and reproaches, it is continually receiving. 
How often is it forced to be prejent, and even 
to give c.jjiftance, in the condemnation and exe- 
cution of it/elf? How many, with declamation 

moll: 



and PaJJions, upon the Under ft andlng, 383 

mod extravagant, with ideas molt deranged, 
with apprehend ons mo.1 fanciful, have abufed 
the poor imagination, whilft all their cenfure 
and alarm have had no better, than an imaginary 
foundation ? * 

A. mind too imaginative does, indeed, often 
join its ideas together in wild and ridiculous 
afibtiations One who is called, a wit, joins 
only thole which appear odd and fantaftic. But 
he, whofe judging are exactly poifed by his ima- 
ginative powers, who is, according to our fcheme 
at once, lively to conceive, and fober to judp-e, 
collec"ls together only thoje ideas, which are pro- 
per to fet the fubjett before him in fuch a 
light, as to enable him to form an exact de- 
termination. The power of imagining, is, there- 
fore, in its place, as necefifary, as the power of 
judging. Suppofe a mind which could only re- 
member — It would fall, at once, into the track 
marked out by others, and would never employ 
its own powers, by reafoning and determining for 
itfelf. Accordingly we find, that perfons of the 
fhongeft memory have generally the weakeft 
judgments. 

If thefe piinciples are juft, a mind, which 
could not imagine, could not reajon. If would 
have no materials before it, on which to form 
its decifion, Its view of any fubjec> would be 
narrow and defective. Obferve, on the other 

* - - - " turbida tcrret imngo." Virgil. &n. IV. 353. 

hand, 



384 Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, 

hand, a mind, keen and fervent in the pro- 
fecution of a favourite fubjecSt, viewing it at- 
tentively on every fide, catching every ray of 
light, which can illuminate, and every kindred 
fentiment, which can illuftrate it. Without 
animation and ardour, theje would never have 
been difcovered ; without imagination and affec- 
tion, the underftanding would have lain torpid 
and inactive. Fancy, that noble and neceflary 
power, has placed the fubjecl: in every pofljble 
combination of form and circumftance, has 
called in to its aid ideas, images, and analogies, 
which, at flrft, feemed molt foreign and inappli- 
cable ; and has thus beheld it in afpects, which 
the dull plodder would never have imagined. 
By this means, a knowledge is acquired, various, 
extenfive, and exacl, beyond what could other- 
ways, have poffibly been obtained. The office 
of the underftanding, is, merely that of a judge, 
to pafs fcntence upon the caufe before it. The 
imagination colle&s and arranges the evidence, 
and brings it before the deciding power, in 
fuch a form, as may lead to an accurate and 
judicious determination. 

This influence of the imagination and paffions 
upon the judgment muft, however, differ greatly, 
according to the different kinds of evidence, of 
which different Jubjefts are capable. In mere 
mathematics, where the mind has to contemplate 
•pure demonflrative truth, little more is neceflary, 

than 



and PaJJions, upon the Under/landing. 385 

than fuch a degree of memory, as to keep in view 
the fleps of the procefs, and fo much under/land- 
ing, as to be able to apply the plainer!: axioms 
and to fee the truth of demonftration. Surely, no 
great exertion or exaltation of mind is necefTary 
to this. You would not call that a.fuperior/pirit 9 
which v/as able to fee, with infallible certainty, 
truths, of which, when properly underftood, it 
is impofTible to doubt. 

Here, we grant, high degrees of imagination, 
fenfibility, tafte, are not necefTary. A mind, which 
could not fee the certainty of fuch conclusions, if 
able to trace, and to remember the fteps by 
which it had proceeded, would hardly deferve 
to be called rational. 

Thofe, certainly, are the greatejt and noblefi 
fpirits, who can exert the whole ccllecled powers 
of their minds, upon the contemplation of 
important Subjects, and determine, with clear- 
nels and truth, where the evidence is not fo 
irrefiftible, as that the conclufion cannot 
poffibly be miftaken. The mod common, the 
woft important, the greateft Subjects which can 
come before the human mind, are not capable 
of dauonft rathe evidence. Yet, they have 
evidence of a peculiar kind, which can only 
be difcerned, in its full proportion, by a mind, 
properly prepared to receive it. Befides me- 
mory and understanding, you muft call in other 

Vol. I. C c powers. 



3 8 6 Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, 

powers. The heart mult be in right order. The 
mind mud feel and imagine juftly, in order to a 
perfect fentence. 

Let us take, for an illustration, one of the 
moft refpectable and ufcful profeffions — that of 
a Fhyfician. The fcience he profefTes, is nor, 
furely, that of dernonttration. He will himfelf 
acknowledge, that it is only, a fcience of pro- 
bability. Suppofe him devoid of imagination, 
and of feeling. How ill qualified would a 
merely mathematical mind be, to prefcribe, in 
cafes which demand, and almoft every cafe in. 
fame degree demands, prefence of mind, largenefs 
of thought, a view to remote and poujble confe- 
quences, together with that quicknefs, penetra- 
tion, and fagacity, which muft unite together, 
to conltitute the \Jkilful pfrfician ! — Take common 
life. What is Prudence, but another name, for 
an ability to imagine all the poffible or probable 
confequences of fuch or fuch a conduct, of fore- 
feeing, fuch and fuch difficulties, and of balancing 
the good and evil, in fuch a manner, as, upon 
the whole, to avoid the greateft evil, and to 
obtain the greateft good ? But how could this 
poiTibly be done, without a lively, active, and 
well directed imagination ? 

Nay, we may go farther* and fay, that even a 
Mathematician will make .very little progrefs in 
demonfirative fcience, without the aid of this 
noble, but much miftaken and abufed faculty. 

Here, 



andpajjions, upon the Under/landing, 387 

Here, it is true, imagination has the narroweft 
range : but it would be falfe to fay, it has no 
range at all. For what are the fubjedts of his 
boafted reafonings ? They are points, lines, 
JuperficieSy all of which he can only imagine, 
A Point has neither length, breadth, nor thick- 
nefs. A Line has length, but neither breadth, 
nor thicknefs. A Superficies has length, breadth, 
but not thicknefs. Are then Lines, Points, or 
Superficies, objects of vifion, or of fenfe ? By no 
means. They are the mere creatures of fancy. 
His Figures likewife of circles, fquares, &c. are 
not perfect:. They contain innumerable ex- 
crefcences, and deformities ; and yet, his 
reafonings fuppofe figures exact and faultlefs. 

And, how often muft imagination prefent before 
him, diftances, heights, orbits, &c. which he 
has not immediately under his eye, which he 
cannot poffibly concieve, without the aid of fancy ? 
The application of mathematics to Aflronomy, 
Navigation, &c. demands the fame afliftance. 
"Who would fcruple to fay, that Sir Ifaac Newton, 
enjoyed a brilliant imagination? In fketching the 
outlines of his amazing fyftem — in roving through 
the pathlels wilds of fpace — in contemplating 

" The dependencies, 
" The bearings, and the ties" 

of this ftupcndous univerfe, mull he not have 
pofieiTed a fancy of the boldefi wing, yet ac- 
companied, in all its flight, by the molt wife 

C c 2 and 



388 Dr. Barms en the Influence of the Imagination, 

and watchful reafon ? Let me juft mention 
another exalted character, in proof of the fame 
point — Mr. Locke. No where do you perceive 
ftronger lines of a vigorous and aiftive fancy, 
than in the writings of this immortal philofopher. 
His (tile is full of imagery and allufion, the mod 
beautiful and happy. He has all the fignatures 
of a glowing, and, at the fame time, of a Jober and 
cautious mind. For Juch imagination only do 
I plead — under the command, and employed in 
the fervice, of that judgment, whofe province 
it is, to direct, and to control. 

Even in the act. of reasoning, which is gene- 
rally efteemed the moft folemn and ferious 
procefs of the mind, imagination is effentially 
necefTary. For if the mind be not able to 
chufe with advantage thofe intermediate ideas, 
on which its reafonings depend ; if it is not 
able, by means of this excurfive power, to range 
abroad, to view its fubject on every fide, to 
catch minuter, as well as larger fimilitudes and 
differences ; if, in one word, it has not activity, 
comprehenfion, quicknefs, all which depend 
chiefly upon imagination, it will not poffefs, in 
any confiderable ftrength, that illative power, 
which we acknowledge to be fo noble a faculty 
of human nature. 

If the preceding obfervations are true, with 
refped to mathematics— the region of fcience 
which feems moft remote from the fairy land of 

fancy, 



and Paffions, upon the Under/landing. 389 

fancy, there will be little difficulty in proving 
our point with refpedt to thoje provinces, which 
lie nearer to its confines. And, in its own pro- 
vince, in all that extenfive and beautiful domain, 
in which the pleafures of the imagination grow, 
as in their native foil, it would be ridiculous 
to afk, whether imagination be not conducive 
to exaftnefs of judgment. It would be juft: 
the fame, 'as to inquire, whether a man muft 
have eyes, to judge of vifible objeds ; or ears, to 
judge of founds. Through all the wide empire 
of cnticifm, of tafte, of poetry, of painting, of 
mufic, of arts, fancy reigns with almoft fovereign 
fway. A poet, or an artift, without imagination, 
might as well be without ideas. Mr. Hayley 
has very juftly obferved, « That three things 
(( are necerTary to conftitute a found critic— 
m Good underflanding—\\ve\y imagination— refined 
" fenfibilityr * In general, to judge well upon any 
fubjeCt, you muft have a kindred fpirjfc If the 
poet muft be » alive to fancy," a reader of poetry 
muft inherit a portion of the fame infpiration. 

Let us fuppofe a critic, fuch as, pehaps, the 
world has fometimes ken afiuming the name, to 
pafs fentence upon Milton's Paradife Loft. Does 
he relifji and enjoy this divine performance ? 
Does he tafte its exquifite beauties ? Does his 
imagination glow with its defcriptions? Does 

f Haley's Eflay on. Epic Poetry. Notes to the firfl Book. 

Cc 3 he 



390 Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, 

he fenfibly feel the fweetnefs, richnefs, and 
loftinefs of its language ? Is he alive to all 
the fuperior charms of its fubjecT, its fcenery, 
and its execution ? Alas ! No. Like the fly 
on St. Paul's Cathedral, he (tumbles at a ftraw, 
or a hair. But, is this cold-blooded thing, whofe 
fcanty foul cannot expand itfelf to the dimenfions 
of fuch a fubjecl, who cannot take fn, at one grand 
and ennobling view, its whole extent and ad- 
justment, the connection of its parts, the cha- 
racters, the machinery, the end — is he the proper 
critic of Milton ?* 

* " How did Garrick fpeak the foliloquy laft night ?" 
" Oh ! Againft all rule, my Lord, moft ungrammatically, 
*' Between the nominative cafe, which, your Lord/hip 
,c knows, mould govern the verb, he fufpended his voice 
" a dozen times ; three feconds, and three fifths, my Lord) 
*t each time." " Admirable grammarian !" " But, in. 
" fufpending his voice — was the fenfe fufpended likewife? 
" Did no exprefiion of attitude or countenance fill up the 
" chafm? Was the eye filent ? Did you narrowly look?" — 
" I looked only at the ftop-watch, my Lord." — " Ex- 
" cellent obferver !" 

" And what of this new book the whole world makes fuch 
'* a rout about? — " Oh ! it is quite out of all plumb, my 
" Lord. — Quite an irregular thing ! Not one of the 
f angles at the four corners was a right angle. — I had my 
" rule and compaffes, my Lord, in my pocket." — " Ex- 
'! cellent critic !" 

«' And for the epic poem your Lord/hip bid me look 
c< at — U pon taking the length, breadth, heighth, and 
" depth of it, and trying them at home upon an exaft 
" fcale of Boffu's— 'tis out, my Lord, in every one of 
f* its dimenfions" — "Admirable connoiiTeur !" Sterne. 

Imagination 



and Paffions, upon the Under/landing. 391 

Imagination is necefTary to reprefent to the 
mind, all things dift ant, future, invifible, and even 
paft, when they are not exactly recalled by memory. 
How wide ! How important its province ! In 
religion, the happinefs of Heaven, the nature, 
character, and employment of fuperior beings, 
the folemn procefles of Judgment — Eternity— 
and even the Deity himfelf, can only come before 
us, as drawn by the imagination. 

In Hiftory, you continually imagine characters, 
events, times, places, circumstances, which you 
have never feen. Thefe are portrayed to your 
fancy, by the pen of the hiftorian ; and your 
pleafure and improvement will very much de- 
pend upon the clearnefs and celerity, with 
which you paint to yourfelf the different fcenes, 
which are palling before you. All the pleafures 
of Tafte depend abfolutely upon a vigorous and 
cultivated imagination. Even in the attual 
contemplation of the fcenes of nature, imagination is 
as necefTary, to refined pleafure, as the eye. 
Perhaps we might, without great impropriety, 
call it, the eye of the mind. If any perfon mould 
think, this appellation would better belong to the 
under ft anding, let him recoiled, that the eye of 
the body can give no exacl information, till 
reclified by the judgment. It is fo with the 
imagination. The ideas it prefents muft be 
brought before the higher tribunal of the 

C c 4 under- 



392 Dr. Barnes en the Influence of the Imagination, 

underftanding, and receive their fentence, ac- 
cording to its fuperior determination. 

I (hall, perhaps, be told of the lover, who fees 
in his miftrefs an imaginary idol, decked all o'er 
with charms, perfect and matchlefs, in every air, 
and in every attribute. I fhall be told, of the 
amazing change in his judgment, when time and 
better knowledge have taken the glare from 
the object, ftripped the idol of her divinity, and 
faded her charms, even to uglinefs. But, againft 
this exception we meant to guard, by main- 
taining only, a due poife and degree of the ima- 
ginative quality. 

•* The lover, the lunatic, and the poet, are 

" Of imagination all compact." Shakefpeare. 

Minds, fo exceffively imaginative, cannot be 

judicious. 

But, on the other hand, fuppofe a perfon to 
contemplate excellence, female excellence, without 
imagination — juft as he would, a mathematical 
problem. Would he do more exaft and impartial 
iuftice to the fubject ? 

Would the fairer fex confent to abide the 
fentence of Juch a judge? Would they not jujlly 
complain, that though he wore the form, he had 
not the fentiment, the foul of a human being ? 
Would they not appeal — and who would 
not juflify the appeal — to the decifion of a mind, 
capable of feeling, and of fancy, and therefore 

rational^ 



and Pajions, upn the Underftanding. 393 

rational, and alone competent to judge of that 
excellence, which is fitted to cheer and captivate 
the heart ? 

But it has been the hard fate of imagination 
to be,, in general, fpoken of, in its excefs. We 
feldom hear it mentioned, by thofe who declaim 
againfi; it, without hearing; of the flights of fancy, 
the extravagance, the agJation, the wildnefs, the 
/allies, the fervours, the excentricitics, of a heated 
imagination. The fervour, the glow, however, 
belong rather to pajfion, than to, imagination. 
The imagination indeed may excite the paffion ; 
and thus they afcribe the attributes of the effett to 
the caufe. 

That imagination may, that it often doe; 
tranfgrefs its proper bounds, we mod readily 
acknowledge. That it is neceffary to hold it in 
with a tight rein, that it may not run away with 
the underftanding, and lead to conclufions 
fanciful and groundlefs, we allow, in us fulleft 
extent. We contend only for that degree, which 
will confift with the exadlnefs of judgment. 

The vivacity and ftrength of imagination, in 
children, is aftonifhing. Their knowledge of 
objects being very flight and fuperficial, a few 
faint refemblances are fufficient to realize and 
embody them. By degrees, as their knowledge 
becomes more extenfive and exact, their power 
of imagining declines, the power of judging is 
improved, and when thefe two powers have 

attained 



394 Dr. Barnes on the Influence of the Imagination, &c. 

attained their proper balance, the mind has attained 
its higheft capacity. 

That "great wits are to madnejs near allied? 
That " great genius's are too imaginative," 
proves only, that the mind, when in a frame too 
creative and fanciful, is not fufficiently judicious. 
But, furely, a degree of warmth may be necejfary 
to a tool, for its proper action ; and yet, that 
warmth may be increafed, till it is improper for 
fervice. 

It will, perhaps, be faid, that lunatics and 
madmen are under the dominion of fancy, and 
that upon this account their judgments are errone- 
ous- It is anfwered, that, in general, if you will 
but grant their premifes, they will reafon from 
them, with aftonifhing quicknefs and clearnefs of 
argumentation. Unhappily, their minds are, in 
fome particular points, by wrong aflbciations, 
become deranged and extravagant. This is their 
difeafe. But the fervour imparted to their minds, 
feems rather to have fharpened, than impaired, 
their reafoning powers. 

Let, then, under/landing and judgment ever be 
confidered as the prefiding faculties of the human 
fpirit. To their control, let every other power 
ultimately fubmit. Let the imagination and the 
poffions be confidered merely as their' fervants, 
obedient to their command. But, whilft they 
are thus obedient, let them have the praife of 
food and ufeful fervants j and above all^ let them 

not 



Dr. Eafon on the AJcent of Vapour'. 395 

not be compelled to criminate and condemn 
them/elves. Or, according to the juft fimile of 
the poet. 

«' Whilft reafon holds the helm — 
" Let pajjion be the gale." Pope, 

And let imagination fly abroad to collect the 
various fcattered breezes, which, thus united 
into one ftrong current, may carry the vefTel 
forward, acrofs the ocean of life, under Juch a 
pilotage, with fafety, and fatisfaction. 



An Essay on the Ascent of Vapour: By 
A. Eason, M. D. &c. Read Nov. 27, 1782. 

-___-_ .. Unde ferenas 

Ventus agat nubes, quod cogitet humidus 
Aufter, Sol tibi figna dabit. 

Fir. Geo. C. I. ver. 461. 

* I HERE are few phenomena in nature, which 
-*- have puzzled philofophers more, than the 
afcent of vapour: and the different theories laid 
down by Doctors Hallcy and Defaguliers, have 
been rejefted, while another, not lefs liable 
to objeftions, has been almoft univerfally re- 
ceived. 

This theory, which I fhall prefently mention, 
was at firft invented by a French Gentleman, 

Monfieur 



396 Di\ Eafon on the A/cent of Vapour. 

Monfieur le Roi, and afterwards revived by 
Lord Karnes, and Doctor Hugh Hamilton. It is 
this — That the air diflblves water, as water 
does faline fubftances : the folution being per- 
fect, the air will become tranfparent. 

Objections. 1. Were this theory true, evapo- 
ration could not be performed without air ; but 
Mr. Watt, contrary to the theory fupported 
by Lord Kaimes and Dr. Hamilton, has proved, 
that when water in vacuo was boiled with a degree 
of heat very little greater than that of the human 
body, the fteam came over, and was condenfed 
in the refrigeratory. But he relates, that the eva- 
poration was not quicker than in the open air. 

2. Were the doctrine of folution true, the air 
would be heavier, the more water it contained ; 
and, as clouds contain a great portion of water, 
they ought to float on the furface of the earth, 
and not in the higher regions, as we daily ob- 
ferve. 

3. We never could expect any rain, unlefs the 
air were fuperfaturated with water ; and it would 
only yield to us, wrnt it could not retain in 
folution. 

4. It is univerfally allowed, that heat con- 
tributes, very much, towards converting water 
jnto vapour, which is again condenfed by cold f 
In what manner, will the do&rine of folution 
account for the fpontaneous evaporation of water, 
jiiid its being fufpended in air, in the coldeft 

weather, 






Dr. Eajon on the A/cent of Vapour. 397 

weather, even when the thermometer is below 
the freezing point ? Though I cannot allow of 
fuch a folution as above mentioned, I can, 
however, readily admit of a ftrong attraction 
betwixt air and water ; for no air is found with- 
out water, and no water without air. 

Water, which is eight hundred times heavier 
than air, by a very fmall degree of heat, may be 
converted into vapour, which vapour is one 
thoufand eight hundred times lighter than air, 
according to Mr. Watt. It confequently follows, 
that vapour will rife up in the atmofphere, to 
the height of its own fpecific gravity ; but, long 
before it could reach to fo high a region, it would 
be condenfed by cold, and return to the earth 
in rain, were it not for the latent heat* it con- 
tains, and the ele&ric matter in the air. 

Whatever I mention concerning Electricity, 
is from fafts, and not from any theory, written 
about it, which is above my comprehenfion. But 
as the terms now in ufe, viz. pofitive and 
negative, or plus and minus, are generally beft 
underftood, I fhall exprefs myfelf by them. 

* That heat enters into vapour, and becomes an ingre* 
dient in it, is certain. For example : if we diflil a pound 
of fteam, the water in the refrigeratory will be heated by 
it, 2s much as by a pound of water heated one thoufand 
and twelve degrees; fo eight hundred degrees of heat 
appear, though the fteam is not fenfibly hotter than boil- 
ing water, which is two hundred and twelve. Exp. 

The 



46 8 Dr. Eafon on the A/cent of Vapour. 

The able Nollet has proved, that water elec- 
trified, will evaporate fatter, than water which is 
not electrified. Does it not follow, that the 
more electric matter is in the air, the quicker 
the evaporation of water will be ? And Mr. 
Cavallo has proved, that at all times the atmo- 
fphere is electrified, but much ftronger in frofly, 
than in warm weather ; and by no means lefs in 
the night than in the day: it is like wife ftronger 
in elevated, than in low places. From thefe 
facts, we may be enabled to account, why- 
evaporation is carried on during very cold 
•weather. All the heat contained in water, 
above what is fuflicient to keep it in a fluid 
Hate, will convert it into vapour ; which, in a 
north or north eaft wind, when the electric matter 
greatly abounds, will be carried off with much 
rapidity; and, by the power of electricity, will 
be rendered ftill lighter, the higher it afcends ; 
each particle repelling each other, and prevent- 
ing the cold from condenfing the vapour, in its 
afcent through the cold regions of the atmo- 
sphere. The higher it rifes, the more fpace 
there is for expanfion ; and the more it is ex- 
panded, the clearer will the atmofphere appear, 
and, probably, the higher the mercury will rife 
in the barometer. 

It likewife appears, that the electric matter 
is more fenfible near the furface of the earth, in 

cold 



^ 



Dr. Eqfon on the Ajcent of Vapour. 399 

Cold northern countries, than in warm fouthern 
places. Mr. Volta, with a very fimple apparatus, 
on the upper gallery of St. Paul's, produced 
an electric fpark, which, he told me, in Italy, 
could not be done, but on a very high moun- 
tain, or in a fituation greatly elevated. This 
feems a wife provifion in nature, that the electric 
matter mould appear near the furface of the 
earth in cold climates, to raife up and fufpend 
the vapour in the air, which otherways, would 
be condenfed by the cold ; whereas, in warm 
countries, the heat of the earth will be fufficient 
to raife vapours to a great height, which are 
afterwards carried (till higher, by the electric 
matter in the upper regions. This, perhaps, 
is the caufe, why the air is fo clear and tranfpa- 
rent in warm climates. 

By making fome obfervations on the falling 
of rain, we fhall have other proofs, that the 
electric matter is the great caufe, by which 
vapour is fupported in the atmofphere. Here 
I muft obferve a fad, well known to all prefent, 
that bodies electrified, by the fame electric 
power (no matter whether pofitive or negative) 
repel each other j and when electrified by the 
different powers, that is, the one plus and the 
other minus, attract each other : on coming into 
contact, an equilibrium is reftored, and neither 
of them will mew any figns of electricity. 

From 



400 Du Eofcn on the AJcent of Vapour. 

From this it follows : If two clouds are elec- 
trifled by the fame power, they will repel each 
other, and the vapour be fufpended in both -, 
but, when one is pofitive and the other negative* 
they will attract each other, and reflore an equi- 
librium. The electric power, by which the 
vapour was fufpended, being now destroyed 
by the mutual action of the clouds on each other, 
the particles of water will have an opportunity of 
running together into each other, and, as they 
augment in fize, will gain a greater degree of 
gravity, defcending in fmall rain, or a heavy 
fhower, according to circumftances. 

A cloud, highly electrified, pafiing over a 
high building or mountain, may be attracted by, 
and be deprived of its electricity, without or 
with a violent explofion of thunder. If the cloud 
is electrified plus, the fire will defcend from the 
cloud to the mountain j but, if it be electrified 
minus, the fire will afcend from the mountain to 
the cloud. In both cafes, the effect is the fame^ 
and generally, heavy rain immediately, or foori 
after, follows : this is well known to the inha- 
bitants of, and travellers among, mountains. 

From this, we can eafily account, why thunder-* 
Ihowers are often partial, falling near, or among 
mountains, and the rain in fuch quantities, as 
to occafion rivers to be overflowed j whilft, at 
the diftance of a few miles, the ground continues 

parched 



Dr. Efifon on the Afcent of Vapour. 40 1 

parched up with drought, and the roads covered 
with dull.* 

It often happens, that one clap of thunder 
is not fufiicient to produce rain from a cloud, 
nor even a fecond : in ihort, the claps muft. be 
repeated, till an equilibrium is reftored, and 
then the rain muft, of confequence, fall. Some- 
times we may have violent thunder and light- 
ning without rain, and the black appearance of 
the heavens may be changed to a clear tranfparent 
fky, efpecially in warm weather. To account 
for this, it muft be remembered, as I lately 
faid, that one or more claps of thunder are not 
always fuffkient to produce rain from the clouds: 
fo, if an equilibrium be not reftored, little or 
no rain will fall, and in a ftiort time, the elec- 
tric matter, paffing from the earth to the clouds, 
or ' the fuperabundant quantity in the air, will 
electrify thofe black clouds, by which means the 
particles of vapour will be expanded, raifed 
higher, and the air become clear. Clouds 
may be melted away, even when we are look- 
ing at them, by another caufe, that is, by the 

• Sajpe etiam immenfum coelo venit agmen aquarum. 
Et faxlam glomerant tempeftatem imbribus atrfs 
Colle&ae ex alto nubes. 

lpfe pater, media nirnbrorum in no£le, corufca 
Fulmina molitur dextra, quo maxima motii 
Terra tremit. Virg. 

Vol. I. D d heat 



402 Dr. Eqfon en the AJcent of Vapour. 

heat of the fun. We know, that tranfparenJ 
bodies are not heated by the fun, but opaque 
ones are ; the clouds being opaque bodies, are 
warmed by the rays of the fun fhining on them, 
and any additional quantity of heat will rarify 
the vapour, and occafion its expanding in the 
air, which will foon become tranfparent. When 
vapour is made to expand, more than it would 
otherwife do, a certain quantity of abfolute heat 
is neceffary to keep it in the form of vapour? 
therefore, when the receiver of an air-pump is 
exhaufting, it appears muddy, and a number of 
drops are found within it ; the moifture contained 
in the air, in the form of vapour, being made to 
occupy a greater fpace than what is natural to 
it, and receiving no addition of heat, a part of it 
it condenfed.* 

If, therefore, the air is fuddenly rarified, a few 
drops of rain will defcend, as may often be ob- 
ferved in the fummer feafon. 

I have repeatedly obferved, efpecially during 
the fummer, when the wind is at north eaft, 
that the weather is, in general, cold and dry, 
with a clear atmofphere. Should the wind fud- 

* On this principle, we can readily account for the milt, 
which appears, on difcharging an air-gun : the condenfed 
air in the chamber of the barrel, on being fet free, will ex- 
pand fuddenly, occupying a larger fpace, and no additional 
heat being acquired, the vapours mult neceflarily be con- 
denfed in the form of mill. 

denly 



Dr. Eafon on the Ajcenl of Vapour, 403 

idenly change to fouth weft, in a few hours, black 
clouds begin to gather, vegetables look fickly, 
and droop their leaves ; and, foon after, comes on 
a violent ftorm of thunder, with heavy rain.* 

This change, I imagine, is not fo much owing 
to the fouth weft wind bringing rain, as to the 
atmofphere's being changed from an electric 
ftate, capable of fufpending vapour, to a ftate 
of parting .with its moifture. As foon as the 
ftorm is going off", vegetables revive from their 
languid ftate, and the air recovers its ufual 
afpecl:. From this we may conclude, that no 
inftrument can be made to afcertain the quantity 
of moifture in the air : all that is, or ought to 
be expected from a hygrometer, is to (hew, 
whether the air be in a ftate to retain, or part 
with its moifture. In apparent dry weather it 
may point to rain ; and when it rains, it may 
point to fair. For this reafon, the (tones of halls, 
and fmooth fubrtances, are often bedewed with 
wet, in dry warm weather, (that is, the air is in 
a ftate to part with its moifture) and, vice ver/d, 
they will dry in the time of rain. 

Left this paper fhould exceed the common 
limits of time in reading, I (hall pafs over thofe 
obfervations, which might be made on fogs or 
mifts ; a few excepted, which I (hall fubjoin in a 

• " Ingcmiiunt AuilrJ, et denfiffiraus imber." Virg. ' 

D d 2 note. 



404 T>r. Ed/on on the AJcent of VdpotiY'. 

note.* I fhall, therefore, conclude with a fhort 
fummary of the whole. 

i. That, heat is the great caufe, by which 
water is converted into vapour, which is con- 
denfed by cold. 

2. That, electricity renders vapour fpecifi- 
cally lighter, and adds to its abfolute heat, 
repelling its particles ; which particles would 
be condenfed by cold : and that, electricity is 
the great agent by which vapour afcends to the 
upper regions. 

* Fogs are produced by two caufes as different as theif 
effects are oppofite. A fog may be be produced by a preci- 
pitation of rain, in very fmall particles, like a cloud floating 
on the furface of the earth. In this cafe the air is moift 
and damp, and never fails to wet a traveller's cloaths ; the 
ftones of the ftreet, painted doors, and hard, cool, fmooth 
bodies are generally covered with moifture, which often 
runs in large drops: this, I dare fay, has been obferved 
by every perfon. Secondly, a fog may be produced by 
the abforption of moifture, whea the air is too dry, and 
differs from the other juft defcribed ; for it will not im- 
part any of its moifture even to dry bodies, ho damp is to 
be met with on ftones, polilhed marble, &c. This fact is 
well known to the inhabitants on the fea coaft of Fifefhire, 
who during their fummer months, have frequent opportu- 
nities of obferving a fog in the afternoon, driving up the 
Firth of Forth, with a drying eaft wind, which often blafts 
the trees and young vegetables, and therefore, in a fmall 
degree, refembles the Harmattan in drying up the ground, 
and robbing vegetables of their moifture. 

3. That 



On the Merit of the Ancients, t?V. 405 

3. That, when the electric power, by which 
vapour is fufpended in the atmofphere, is de- 
ftroyed, a heavy mift, fmall rain or thunder- 
fhowers, will be the confequence. Had the 
advocates for the doctrine of folution, made heat 
and electricity, the folvents, their theory would 
have been lefs exceptionable.* 



On the comparative Merit of the Ancients 
and Moderns, with refpeft to the imitative 
Arts. By Mr, Thomas Kirshaw. Read 
February 19, 1783. 

Vitaque tam longx brevior non fufficit Arti. 

Frefnoy de arte Graphica. 

/ T" -V HE life of man being too Jhort, and the 
"¦* extent of human abilities too confined, 
to make confiderable improvements or inven- 
tions in any art, we ought to view the per- 
formances of celebrated men, with all the 
candour, and generofuy, they fo well merit. 

Even, after all the advantages we have received 
from the united ftud;es of ages, we may, with 
great juftice fay, how fmall and imperfect is all 
our boafted wifdom, and, how much to be re- 
gretted is it, that we have not made a greater 

* This paper is, through accident, placed out of the 
prder in which it lhould have been inferted. 

D d 3 progrefs 



406 On the Merit of the Ancients 

progrefs in the fpacious field of fcience ! — This 
fhort eflay is intended to point out the excel- 
lencies of the ancients in the imitative arts: 
yet, at the fame time, to allow the moderns 
their due fhare of fame, in having, not only 
made fome improvements, but inventions, of 
which the ancients were entirely ignorant. 

There is not a doubt, but the ancients pofTefled 
a polifhed tafte, and a critical knowledge of the 
various and exquifite forms of beauty : they 
knew the arts, could only receive their per- 
fection from ideal beauty fuperior to what is 
ever found, in individual, and imperfect nature. 
There is no man equal, in ftrength and pro- 
portion to the Farnefian Hercules : nor, any 
woman comparable, for fymmetry of form, to 
Medicean Venus. 

Thefe inftances feem to prove, that the au- 
thors of the fineft remains of antiquity formed 
to themfelves ideas of ferfecl nature, and 
collected from various individuals, what no 
one could fupply. 

It is faid, that Zeuxis, when he painted his 
Helena, felected five of the moft beautiful 
virgins that could be found ; and, whatever 
nature had formed moft perfect in each, he 
united in a fingle figure. 

Thus painters, and fculptors, render their 
ideas more perfect, and exalt their Art above 

Nature 



and Moderns, with refpeft to the Arts. 407 

Nature herfelf. In this manner, by contem- 
plating grand and exquifite forms of beauty, 
the operations of the hand are directed by the 
image in the mind: but how far to proceed, 
and when to flop, muft be left to the judgment 
of the artift. 

That the ancients bear the pajm from the 
moderns in fculpture, will not be contefted : 
their religion fanclified and encouraged that 
branch of fcience. Gods, Demigods, and He- 
roes, all confpired to bring it into the higheft 
repute : and their images were often depofited in 
buildings of the moil exquifite tafte, to com- 
memorate particular occurrences. The ra»e 
for highly ornamented edifices, perhaps never 
rofe to a greater height, than amongft the 
Romans. Thefe fons of fortune acquired fo 
much wealth, and, by plundering diftant climes, 
had fo collected the riches of whole kingdoms 
into one city, that there was no way left to 
diflipate fuch immenfe fums, but by engaging 
in the mod expenfive works of arr. Each 
ambitious conqueror, defirous to tranfmit his 
own actions, and thofe of his anceftors to 
pofterity, called in to his aid the fculptor, 
and the architect, whofe utmoft fkill was 
exerted to blazon their atchievements in the 
folidity of ftone and marble. 

This (hews, in fome meafure, why Sculpture 
outftripped her filter Art - 5 for the fpecimens of 

1} d 4 ancient 



40 8 On the Merit of the Ancients 

ancient Painting are much inferior to modern 
productions. They are deficient in colouring, 
chiaro-obfcuro, and keeping. Several of the 
Claffics* tell us, there were, but four colours or 
pigments in ufe amongft the ancient artifb, viz. 
black, white, yellow, and red. Now, it is im- 
'poflible to produce, from thofe colours only, the 
variety of tints neceftary to equal even a tolerable 
colourift of the moderns. Although this evinces 
nothing againft the abilities of the ancients, we 
may fairly conclude, that the rich and luxuriant 
defcriptions, handed down to us, are inflated 
with hyperbole, fufficient to make us doubt 
the veracity of lbme of their authors. Unfortu- 
nately for thefe warm advocates, the difcoveries 
of Herculaneum havefpitefully contradicted their 
afiertions, and furnifhed us with means to draw 
our own conclufions. It is very poffible they 
might admire, and be furprized at a fight of, what 
appeared to them the ultimatum of perfection. 

The ftories of Zeuxis, and Polygnotus raife 
a fmile. The former is faid to have painted 
fruits fo naturally, that birds attempted to eat 
them ; the latter to have delineated the charac- 
ter and features of the face fo truly, that phyfiog- 
nomifts, upon fight of the portrait, could foretel 
the precifc time of the party's death. Sir Jofhua 
Reynolds, who may be juftly confidered as the 
firft artift in the world, thus delivers his opinion, 

* Pliny, Cicero, 

" In 



and Moderns, with reJpeU to the Arts. 409 

" In antique paintings, there are not the 
tc fmallefb traces to make us think, that what 
(c we call light, and made, or a diftribution of 
*' the work into mafTes, claimed any part of their 
* c attention : thefe may be ranked amongft the 
" defects of the learned PouJJi;i* as well as of 
f< the antique paintings : and the moderns have a 
" right to, that praife which is their due, 1 for 
*' having given fo pleafing an addition to the 
" fplendour of the art. VouJftn\ pure and cor- 
" reel ftile was a direct contrail to the florid 
" and inaccurate ftile of Rubensf -, yet the luxu- 
V riant brillancy and harmony of the latter, fc 
" dazzles the eye, that we cannot help thinking 
" all his deficiencies are fully fupplied." Poujfm 
carried his veneration for the ancients fo far 
as to give his works the air of antique paintings. 
It is certain he copied fome of them, particularly 
the marriage, in the Aldrobrandini palace at 
Rome ; which, in the opinion of that great artift 
before mentioned, is the bed relique of thofe 
remote ages, that has hitherto been found. 
Thofe of the antique paintings which (land 
foremoft, are fine, and correct imitations of 
improved nature; with the chafteft outline; 
formed upon fuch certain principles as no one 

* N. Poujpn, an eminent French painter. Jt mould have 
been noticed, whether it was Nicholas , or Ga/per PouJJ'm. 

f R\ibens, a famous Flcmifh painter, 

has 



4i o On the Merit of the Ancients 

has yet dared to controvert. "But they have 
" a remarkable drynefs of manner, which is, by 
" no means, recommended for imitation." The 
compofitions of the ancients appear to be much 
better calculated for the chiffel, than the pencil. 
Chiaro-fcuro, or the art of diftributing the 
lights and fhadows in a picture advantageoufly, 
as well for the repofe, and fatisfaction of the eye, 
as for the effect of the whole together, feems to 
be a modern invention. By the afiiftance of 
this part of fcience, objects receive more relief, 
truth, and found nefs. The maffes of light and 
fhade are formed by a proper diftribution of 
objects, which, by an artful management, are fo 
difpofed, that all the lights are on one fide, and 
the (hades on the other. Sometimes, refle6ted 
lights are neceffary; at other times they are ufed, 
with a pictorical liberty, to produce the defired 
.effect; it is the knowledge of this that animates 
the canvas, and gives the appearance of corpo- 
real fubftance to a flat furface. Rembrandt^ fo 
far from felecting the moft beautiful and grace- 
ful parts of nature, frequently made a bad choice 
from among the fubjects ihe affords. And, 
although he poflefTed a very moderate portion 
of true tafte, yet the fire and fpirit, with which 
his pictures are finifhed, cannot be feen without 
furprize j and the effect produced by his colour- 



RembrarJt, a great artift of the Flemifh fchool. 



» n g» 



and Moderns, with rejpeft to the Arts. 41 1 

jng, and expreflion, demand our admiration. 
His etchings are collected at a great expence 
for the cabinets of the curious. The fame fpiric, 
which flowed from his pencil, guided his needle. 
Had this eminent artift vifited Rome, and re- 
fined his tafte, it is fuppofed, with his profound 
knowledge of chiaro-fcuro, and colouring, he 
would have .been one of the firft matters in the 
world. 

That part of the art, termed keeping, the 
ancients feem to have been but little acquainted 
with, and without a due management of this, 
every picture would be filled with confufion. 
Inftead of a proper fubordination, each groupe 
or figure, would feem to contend for precedence. 
This want of order deftroys all dignity, and pre- 
vents the artift from forming an agreeable whole. 
Any attempts in antique landfcape, with which 
we are acquainted, are executed wretchedly. 
In that part of the art, the fuperiority of the 
moderns is manifeft. 

We have the authority of Frefnoy* to fay, 
" that, Michael Angelo furpafTed not only all 
<c the moderns, but the ancients in architecture, 
" he quotes the St. Peters at Rome, the Palazzo 
" Farnefe, and the St. Johns at Florence, as 
" proofs of his opinion." 

• Frefnoy, a French artift well known for his Latin poem 
de Arte Graphica, 

Etching, 



412 Chi the Merit- of the Ancients , csV. 

Etching, engraving, mezzotinto, and aqua- 
tints are a!! of modern invention, and of great 
utility. They deliver down to us accurate 
copies from the works of eminent men at a 
frnall expence •, and diffufe abroad the bright 
flame of fcience, fo that even thofe, who are 
far diftant from the centre of the arts, may 
roufe their fouls to a&ion, and enlighten that 
fpark of genius, which might hitherto have lain 
dormant. From thefe meritorious, and in- 
genious improvements, we can judge, with great 
certainty, of the various merits of an artiit, and 
every part, but the colouring, may be critically 
examined. 

The flile of the Italian, Flemifh, or French 
fchools, may be pointed out by thefe copies, 
and frequently the very manner of pencilling, 
by particular artifts, is faithfully reprefented. 
Thefe arguments are not meant to depreciate 
the antiques, they will always engage our admi- 
ration, and moft highly merit it. 

The advantages, received by the moderns, 
from ftudying the ancients, are freely acknow- 
ledged. It is no uncommon thing to hear fome 
people lament the decay of genius, and the de- 
cline of arts, in thefe times, when compared with 
the Auguftan age. However that may be, the 
moderns have a right to claim their full portion 
of fame, in many arts in which the ancients 
could nop inftru£t them. 

From, 



Mr. Wimpey on the Impropriety of allowing^ &V. 4 1 % 

From the candour of this learned Society, 
the writer of this Effay claims protection, and 
hopes, an attempt to inveftigate truth, will not 
be deemed audacity. 



On the Impropriety of allowing a Bounty 
to encourage the Exportation of Corn, &c. 
By Joseph Wimpey. 

IN the converfation on a paper read before 
this Society fome time fince, refpeccincr 
the propriety of keeping ceconomical regifters^ 
their ufe was queflioned in refpeft to one of 
the principal objects, upon fuppofition, that a 
neceffity for it did not exift ; becaufe it had been 
obviated by meafures adopted for that purpofe. 
The object alluded to, is the exportation of corn. 
Notwithstanding all that was urged againft it, 
the writer is fully perfuaded, the meafure re' 
commended is well founded, the objecT: of it of 
very great importance, and that men of very 
good abilities, have had their judgments milled 
by inveterate popular prejudices, or falfe reafon- 
ing. Impreft with an idea of the great im- 
portance of the fubjecl, he begs leave to fubmit 
the following obfervations to the confideration 
of the Society. 

To 



414 Mr. Whnpey on the Impropriety of allowing 

To maintain an argument, not founded on 
juft principles, is like putting to fea without 
compafs or chart. As the vefTel would be the 
fport of the waves dnd winds ; fo would fuch 
a reafoner lie at the mercy of the boifterous 
ftorms of his paflions, and the uncertain bias 
of his inclinations. To avoid both, let us 
premife certain propofitions, where truth is not 
only confonant to reafon, but confirmed by ex- 
perience, and acknowledged facts. 

PROPOSITIONS. 

i. The prime objecl: of civil fociety, is the 
happinefs of the members of whom it is com- 
pofed. No government can be juft, whofe 
fupport and defence do not extend to the equal, 
and indifcriminate benefit of the whole. 

2. Though the good and protection of each 
individual, is either virtually implied, or for- 
mally conditioned or articled for j yet it cannot 
juftly extend further, than may be confiftent 
with public good : for, the rights of all men are 
the fame, and it is mocking to common fenfe to 
fuppofe, that one man, or one clafs of men, 
might, with juftice, be made rich, great, 
and happv, by the mifery and firfferings of a 
hundred men, or at the expence of the reft of 
the community. No government ever intended 
men fhould Wvcupon one another, but be equally 

advantaged 



a Bounty, to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 4 1 5 

advantaged by the mutual affiftance, given to the 
common fupport, of which every individual is 
entitled to an equal fliare. 

3. Public good is the barometer, or, if I 
may ufe the expreflion, the political balance, 
by which the fpecific gravity, the intrinfic 
worth, or fterling value, of every meafure, 
reflecting the public, is to be determined and 
afcertained^ Therefore, every meafure, which 
has a tendency to promote public good, is 
right and defirable : every meafure, which is 
inimical to the public intereft, is a wrong mea- 
fure, and mould be reprobated. To fay other- 
wife, would be repugnant to common knfe, 
therefore falfe and abfurd. 

4. The projects of individuals, in which the 
good of the public is ultimately included, have 
been very defervedly countenanced by public 
encouragement: but fuch encouragement cannot 
confidently be continued longer than the efta- 
blifhment of fuch projects ; for if they could 
not fupport themfelves, and reward the projec- 
tors, they would be abfurd projects, and mould 
be abandoned, as by propofuions fecond and 
third ; the individual is not to be enriched, at 
the unjuft expence and lofs of the public. Now 
all the bounties, of whatever nature or kind, 
whether they refpect produce, manufactures, or 
commerce, are public encouragements ; and their 
origin and exiftence depend, upon the reafonable 

expectation 



4i 6 Mr. Wimpey on the Impropriety cf allowing 

expectation of their being fubfervient to public 
good ; if they are found not to anfwer that pur- 
pofe, they mould be execrated and abandoned 
as public evils, as appears by the foregoing pro- 
pofitions. 

5. Cheap nnd dear are relative terms; and 
are meafured or eftimated, by their rife or fall 
above the medium value. The medium value 
of things may be eftimated, at the price they 
ftand the grower, the breeder, or the manufac- 
turer in, with a reafonable profit: on the fame, 
for the maintenance of himfelf and family, 
be the commodity whatever it may. If it 
deviates from that ftandard, it will be dear, 
in proportion to its advance above it, or cheap, 
as it falls below it. But cheap and dear, being 
relative terms, they muit depend on fomething 
elfe for their existence; and this is very well 
known to be fcarcity and plenty. If the demand 
for any commodity is encreafed, beyond the quan- 
tity adequate to the fupply, its price is necef- 
farily advanced. But if the quantity exceeds 
the demand, the price as ncceffarily falls j and 
it is not in human power to prevent it. From 
hence follows : 

6. Propofition. Whatever meafure, rule, or 
law, increafes the quantity of any commodity, 
in proportion to the demand for it, neceflarily 
makes it cheaper-, and whatever increafes the 

demand, 



c Bounty, to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 417 

demand, in proportion to the quantity, as 
necelTarily renders it dearer. 

Now, there is hardly any public queftion re- 
fpedling agriculture, manufactures, or com- 
merce, but its expedience and ufe may be 
afcertained by fome one, or more, of thefe 
propofitions. 

The queftion before us is of the greateft 
importance:' there is not a Jubjett in the realm, 
whofe intereft is not affected by it. Nothing can 
be more interefting, than that proper meafures 
mould be taken reflecting an article, upon which 
the people depend for their daily fubfiftence. It is 
a meafure, however, in which men of good fenCe 
have been deceived and deluded ; by which millions 
have been foolifhly thrown away, to the advan- 
tage of our neighbours j and which, to this hour, 
has its advocates, who contend, not only for its 
continuance, but alfo for its extenfion. But the 
effeds of popular prejudice are indeed very 
furprizing. — Let us firft take a curfory view of 
its hiftory, and then try its merit by the fore- 
going propofitions. 

Patriotifm, genuine patriotifm, is a word of 
noble fignification. But, a true patriot, one 
who, in all things, at all times, and upon all 
occafions, prefers the good of the community 
to his own private intereft, would be as fineu- 
lar a phenomenon in the political world, as a 
Phcenix in the natural. It is an object one may 
Vol. I. E e contemplate 



4 1 8 Mr. Wimfey on the Impropriety of allowing 

contemplate with pleafure ; but rarely be in- 
dulged with the fight of. Legiflators, like 
Judges, fhould be incorrupt : their ears fhould 
be open to no voice, but that of truth. But 
¦where fhall we find thofe, who have no intereft 
in the laws they enact ; or thofe, who can dived 
themfelves of the influence of fuch intereft ? 

Unhappily, the landed intereft of the country- 
is placed in oppofition to that of commerce, and 
they contemplate each other with an evil eye. 
This has a pernicious tendency ; fince they are 
connected together, like links in a chain, and 
fince their fafety and intereft depend upon their 
union. Neither could fubfift long without reci- 
procal aid. — But to proceed to fads. 

One of the calamities of the civil war was, a 
fcarcity and dearnefs of provifions. When peace 
was reftored, men betook themfelves to their 
civil occupations, and agriculture was encouraged 
by men of ability. In 1687, wheat was at a 
lower price, than it had been at any time in the 
century; fomewhere from three fhillings, to three 
and four-pence a bufhel. The circumftances of the 
farmers, of thofe days, were very different from 
the prefent. If the prices were low, they were, not- 
withftanding, obliged to go to market : nor could 
they keep large flocks, for a change of times, and 
an advance of price. Therefore, when corn fold 
low, their rents were ill paid, and the land-owner 
was affected by, and partook of, the diftrefs of his 

tenant. 



a Bounty, to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 4 1 9 

tenant. To remedy this, the bounty was de- 
viled, and a market was procured abroad : for 
it was clearly feen, as the demand increafed, 
the price mufi do fo too j and the event fully 
evinced the policy of the meafure, for the year 
following, the price was nearly double. Could 
this relief have been given to the farmer and 
land-owner, without injury to the reft of the 
community, it would have been juft: but, when 
it is confidered, that there is no one, even in the 
lowelt circumftances of life, who is not taxed to 
pay the bounty, perhaps it will appear rather 
cruel, to oblige poor wretches, who with the 
greateft care and induftry, cannot provide bread 
fufficient to fupport their families, to contribute 
towards the enriching of the farmer, and in- 
creafing of the rent of the land-owner. 

But, what fays the advocate for the bounty ? 
Why, he tells you, that the time of granting 
it is the great sera, from which, improvements 
in agriculture are to be dated. That at the 
fame time, it has benefitted the land-owner 
and the farmer, has added to the riches of 
the nation, and has lowered the price of corn, 
which is a common blefiing to all. Thac it 
has been very beneficial to the land-owner and 
farmer, we not only admit, but have proved ; 
but that it has added to the riches of the na- 
tion, is denied : and thac it fliould be the means 
of lowering the price of corn, is contradictory, 
abfurd, and impofiible. But it is faid, it has 

E e 2 lowered 



420 Mr. JVim'pey on the Impropriety af allowing 

lowered the price, and the fad is indifputable. — 
Fads, indeed, are ftubborn things, and not to be 
warped to accommodate any body. But, be 
ic remembered, affertions are not fads: and 
any one, who is remarkable for fearlejsnejs of 
aflfertion, can never be depended upon for facts. 

What effed the bounty had upon the price 
of corn, can only be known, by comparing 
the prices for a confiderable number of years, 
before that meafure was adopted, with the fame 
number of years after. This, and this only, 
is the true method of afcertaining the fad. But 
to compare plentiful years with years of fcarcity, 
can only ferve to expofe the fraud and artifice 
of the writer, and to impofe upon the credulity 
of the reader. The following is a true (late of 
the fad, as any one may fatisfy himfelf, who 
will be at the trouble of infpeding the Windfor 
Tables, which he may find in Bifhop Fleetwood's 
Chronicon Pretiqfum, in four trads relating to 
corn : and, I think, in one of the volumes of 
Mujeum Rujlicum et Commerciale. The fad is, 
if the average price of corn be taken from thofe 
tables, for twenty-five or thirty years before the 
bounty was enaded, and for the fame term after, 
it will appear, that the price was confiderably 
lower before the bounty, than it was after. 
This was the time for difcovering the efFeds 
of the bounty; and the fad is, it advanced 
the price, nearly double, the firft year. 

We 



a Bounty ', to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 42 1 

We will now" fhew, that the natural and 
neceflary tendency of the bounty is, to raife the 
price; and that it is impofiible it fhould do 
otherwife ; and therefore abfurd to affert it. The 
advocates for the meafure fay, "It encourages 
the farmer to grow more corn, by providing a 
market abroad ; this makes it more plentiful, and 
confequently cheaper." This, in fact, is faying, 
the farmer has more encouragement to grow 
corn, when the price is lower, than when it is 
higher. The market is nothing to him, 
abstracted from the price. When he fells his 
corn, he neither knows nor cares what becomes 
of it afterwards : he looks only to the price. 
If it affords him a reafonable profit, he proceeds 
with alacrity; and his diligence and induftry 
will be excited in proportion to his gain. But, ic 
feems, the bounty lowers the price and renders it 
cheaper, and, at the fame time, encourages the 
farmer to extend its culture, and grow larger 
quantities, than he would otherwife do ! This 
is the land-owner's argument; but where is the 
man, who can reconcile it to common Jenje ? 
Repugnant as this is to the common fenfe of 
mankind, it is the great argument made ufe of, 
not only to continue the bounty, but to ihcreafe 
and extend it. I could, therefore, wifh, as it is a 
queftion of very great importance, to be permit- 
ted to fift it to the bottom. 

E e 3 The 



422 Mr. Wimpy on the Impropriety of allowing 

The farmer Hands on the fame ground as the 
manufacturer : every article of his farm (lands 
him in a certain price; and, if he cannot fell it 
for a profit, fufficient to maintain himfelf and 
family, in time he muft wade his capital, and 
come to ruin. Suppofe he cannot grow wheat 
under four (hillings a bu(hel, which is about the 
average cod : it is evident, he muft fell it for 
more than four (hillings, or he lofes by that 
article. Now, if the bounty (as the advocates 
for it maintain) lowers the price, is it poffible to 
conceive, that it mould encourage the farmer to 
extend its culture? Or rather, is it not felf- 
evident, that it would not only difcourage 
his fowing corn, but neceffitate him to difcon- 
tinue the practice, to fave himfelf from ruin ? 
Put a fimilar queflion to any Gentleman here, 
who is verfed in manufactures of any kind. 
Suppofe a Velveret (lands him in four (hillings 
a yard : fo long as he can fell it for four (hillings 
and fix-pence, or five (hillings, he will be 
encouraged to make as much as he can : but let 
any meafure be adopted which falls the price to 
three (hillings and fixpence, would he not 
immediately relinquilh that branch, and betake 
himfelf to fomething elfe ? Surely he would. 
And, why mould not the farmer, for the very 
fame reafon, abandon the planting of wheat, 
when the bounty has lowered the price fo, that a 
bufljel, which (lands him in four millings, he can 

only 



a Bounty, to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 423 

only fell for three millings and fix-pence, three 
fhillings, two fhillings and fixpence, or even 
but two fhillings ; for, at all thefe prices has 
wheat been exported ? It is plain then, if the 
price of grain is lower now, than it was in any 
former period, it muft be owing to fome other 
caufe; for a bounty has a diredtly contrary effect. 

Another argument for the bounty is, That it 
encourages exportation j and, as corn is the pro- 
duce of our own lands, it greatly increafes the 
riches of our country. 

I anfwer — To object to the exportation of 
corn, or any other article of commerce, when it 
can be done on advantageous terms, would be 
extreme folly. But exportation, procured by 
means of a bounty, is fo far from being advan- 
tageous, that it deftroys, for the mod part, all 
pofTibility of advantage : even of real, fubftantial 
advantage, which muft, and would happen, if 
not prevented by the bounty. Every man is 
thoroughly fenfible, that, if he purfues a bufinefs 
by which he is a lofcr, the longer he continues 
in it, and the larger his dealings, the more he 
fuffers by it. Juft fo it operates in regard to 
the public ; for the public and individuals only 
differ, as greater and leflcr : and the lofs of the 
one is in exact proportion to that of the other. 
To fhew this, let us fuppofe, for example, as 
before, that wheat (lands the farmer in four 
(hillings a bulhel : that the prefent market price, 

E 4 however, 



4? 4 Mr. Wimpey on the Impropriety of allowing 

however, is no more than thre_e fhillings, and that 
there is not a fufficient demand even at that. The 
legiflature, to relieve the farmer, and accommo- 
date its members, gives a bounty of five fhillings 
a quarter, or feven-pence halfpenny a bufhel, to 
procure a market abroad. And is it riot 'ablejjed 
relief which it affords ? In the firft place, the 
farmer fells for three fhillings what coft him four 
fhillings ; and, towards that three fhillings, the 
public pay feven-pence halfpenny. The fi'ft is a 
lofs of twenty five per cent, and the latter of 
more than twenty ; making together, above forty- 
five per cent. ! What a glorious trade for England, 
attended with fuch immenfe advantages ! But 
how much better for the fagacious Dutchman, 
who buys a commodity at forty five per cent, 
below its real value, which, in the fpace of 
twelve or eishteen months, there is almoft a 
certainty of felling again, fometimes in the fame 
market, at a hundred per cent, profit 

But it may be afked, what is to be done, when 
the nation is fo unfortunate, as to be over- 
whelmed with fuch an abundance : for it muft 
be obferved, fuch low prices never happen, but 
in confequence of a feries of propitious feafons ? 
I anfwer, we fhould then imitate the Dutch, and 
ftore up our corn when cheap, that, when un- 
fruitful feafons come, we may, like them, fell it 
at a large profit without a bounty, with a faving 
of £200,000 a year to the public. This, I 

think. 



a, Bounty , to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 425 

think, is about the average fum we have annually 
paid for bounties, and is fufficient to purchafe 
about a fourth of the corn, we have ufually ex- 
ported. But, giving a bounty of twenty per cent, 
to export corn, when the price is fo low, leaves fo 
little upon hand, that the firft bad feafon which 
comes, raifes the price to double ; and theoi, 
when you fhould fell for a profit, you have no 
corn; but 'are forced to prohibit exportation, 
even without a bounty, or to import from 
abroad, at double the price you fold at. It is 
now about ninety five years, fince the bounty 
commenced, and thus it has operated from the 
beginning. The firft unfavourable feafon, after 
a year of large exportation, hath conftantly 
raifed the price immoderately, as appears from 
the tables above-mentioned, and it is impoffible 
it fhould be otherwife. 

It has been alfo obferved, that in Italy, and 
other places, where corn is not permitted to be 
fent abroad, it is always dear. Doubtlefs it is. 
We have no objection to exportation, when we 
have any corn to fpare : on the contrary, we 
recommend the pra&ice. But, is there no dif- 
ference, between giving a bounty of twenty per 
cent, to force a trade, which reduces you to 
almoft a famine, and felling at a fair average 
price, which obtains all over Europe? The 
former impoverishes and diftrefies you -, while the 
other, if you had any corn to fell, would infalli- 
bly 



426 Mr. Wimpy on the Impropriety of allowing 

bly enrich you. The exportation of corn, upon 
fair and jufl: principles, would be a very valuable 
article of commerce j and not lefs fo, in a national 
view, than a private one, to the land-owner 
and farmer: but fo execrable has been our 
nanagement, by forcing a market with the lofs 
of from thirty to fifty per cent, that when a 
fcarcity comes, when the price advances, and we 
fhould gain fifty per cent, inftead of having corn 
to fell, we are forced to buy, and often to 
give double the price we fold at. 

We quite miltake the matter, in fuppofing, 
the laws, in being, have provided a fufficient 
remedy : no law ever was, or ever can be, 
effectual to that purpoie, while a bounty fubfifts. 
It is in vain to think, that trade, like water, 
will find its own level, when fo large a fluice is 
opened to deftroy that level. We may as well 
throw a quarter of a hundred weight into one 
fcale, to preferve its equilibrium, as to give a 
bounty of twenty per cent, to put us upon an 
equal footing with the other corn-markets in 
"Europe, 

The impropriety of the bounty is not lefs 
apparent, in the influence it has on the farmer's 
conduct. It often tempts him to plant wheat 
on land, which is not fuited to it •, and fome- 
times, two or three years together, on the fame 
land ; which too often proves a great lofs to 
fiimfelf, and alfo to the public. For the farmer 

cannoc 



<? Bounty , to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 427 

cannot fuffer materially in the failure or lofs 
of his crops, but the public will be affected by 
it : and, what is worfe, while he plants wheat, 
for the fale of which the public are loaded with 
a heavy tax, he omits planting other grain, 
which England is obliged to import from abroad. 
At the fame time that we have paid two hundred 
thoufand pounds a year for bounties on corn 
exported, we have paid five hundred thoufand 
pounds for oats imported, making together feven 
hundred thoufand pounds. Can a more ftriking 
proof of the folly of the meafure be defired, 
than giving fuch a fum to force a trade in one 
article, which neceflarily obliges us to be pur- 
chafers for fo large a fum in another, without 
any the lead allowance whatever ? 

But, there are thole who would perfuade us, 
that to grow corn, or trade in it to any advan- 
tage, our ports fhould be always open, that the 
merchant might export or import, as bed fuited 
his interefr. If the merchant were the only man 
in the kingdom whofe welfare was to be 
confidered, perhaps it might be rights or, if 
mankind confidered all nations as brethren, 
among whom charity univerfally prevailed, the 
maxim might be juft. But whilll neighbouring 
nations calculate their own interefr, by the lofs 
of it in others, the country which fhould be 
anxious to provide bread for its neighbours, 
would be fure to want it for itfelf. On this 

plan, 



428 Mr. Wimpsy on the Impropriety of allowing 

plan, what would become of the farmer and land- 
owner ? I anfwer both would be totally ruined. 
In moft countries in Europe^ both land and 
labour are fo much cheaper than in Englandy 
that, in fruitful feafons, grain would be poured 
in upon us in fuch immenfe quantities, and 
the pi ice fo far reduced, that the farmer mud 
give up his bufinefs, and the land-owner 
cultivate his land, for the bare maintenance of 
his family. On the other hand, when the feafons 
proved unfavourable, and the crops were infuffi- 
cient, our ports might be open to no purpofej 
no corn would arrive; the unavoidable con- 
fequence would be, a general famine; and un- 
der the influence of fuch an execrable meafure, it 
would not be in the art or power of man to pre- 
vent it. It is not in corn only, that high cuftoms, 
prohibitory and penal laws, are abfolutely necef- 
fary, but in very numerous branches of manu- 
factures; indeed, in manufacture almoft the whole 
of linen and filk. Vaft quantities of the former 
are imported under duties of, from eighteen to 
twenty-five or thirty per cent ; and a vaft variety 
of fmall wares 'at twenty-five; and one article 
at almoft cent, per cent. Even fine broad-cloth, 
which is a ftaple commodity of this kingdom, 
I have known imported under an infurance of 
twenty-five per cent, ad valorum. In fhort, 
were our ports open to all, as fome Politicians 

advife, 



a Bounty , to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 429 

advife, the Engli/h mechanic mud do as much 
work for three-pence, at leaft, as he now does 
for a fhilling ; and then I aver, he would be 
much better paid, than an ingenious workman now 
is in France. 

But, as I find fome Gentlemen, the moft re- 
fpeclable in general for their judgment, think 
differently on this fubje6r, I wifh to give it a 
little further investigation. I remember Mon- 
fieur 'Turgot (who was, at lead, as refpectable 
for his humanity as for his penetration, and 
in neither, perhaps, much inferior to any man) 
thought it was a cruel meafure to fhut the ports, 
and keep back our corn, when fo many pro- 
vinces were ftarvinff for want of it. He con- 
tended, it was a narrow policy, and that gene- 
ral happinefs requires, that the ports fnould 
be always open, and commerce left to thofe 
whofe bufinefs it was to purfue it. This, I ob- 
ferve, was trying the queftion by the laws of 
humanity, and not by the policy of dates ; and 
particularly, not by the politics of the court of 
France, in one of the firfl: departments of which 
he, at that time, filled a diftinguifhed place, 
with much honour. 

If the laws of juftice and humanity univerfally 
prevailed, and every man, of whatever country 
or nation, efteemed every other man as his bro- 
ther and his friend, if all men had but 

one 



I 



430 Mr. Wimpey on the Impropriety of allowing 

one common object of purfuir, viz. the general 
peace and happinefs of mankind ; and if each 
individual were content with his proportion of 
good, as it arofe from the general (lock, com- 
merce and every thing elfe would put on a very 1 
different face. 

It would be loft labour to attempt to prove, 
what every one is daily an eye-witnefs to. The 
prefent fyftem of politics, not only among 
princes and dates, but in fmall communities, 
and among individuals too, is not only to make 
the greateft advantages poffible of the wants and 
diftreffes of others, but to create, as far as is 
practicable, thofe wants and diftreffes, as the 
moft certain and direct road to fuch advantages. 
Hence, the accurfed third of conqueft, to feed 
the ambition of princes, and the atrocious fpirit 
of monoplizing, to create fcarcity in the midft of 
plenty, todiftrefs, perhaps, ten thoufand perfons 
in order to gratify the infatiable avarice of one. 
Whoever may attend to the prefent fyftem of 
things, as actually exifting in a populous, 
induftrious, fertile country, where the eyes of 
every individual are open to private advantage, 
will foon fee the neceffity of reftrictive laws 
to protect the weak and innocent againft the 
fraud and abufe of thofe, who make artifice and 
Cunning their ftudy, to impoverifh and enflave 
the reft of mankind. This is an affair of the 
laS; importance, which, I am afraid, is very 

far 



a Bounty i to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 43 1 

far from being well underftood. Some, I verily 
believe, from a generofuy of temper, and bene- 
volence of difpofition, wifh to fee every means 
practifed, which might probably reduce the price 
of commodities, efpecially the neceflaries and 
conveniences of life. To this end, it has been 
thought, that if the ports were thrown open, and 
the flux and reflux of the articles of commerce 
might beas'free as the tides, it would neceflarily 
occafion plenty ; and that this would as neceflarily 
lower the price, which would be a convenience to 
all, and particularly, a great blefling to the in- 
duftrious poor. This do&rine, plaufible as it may 
feem, from the humanity of the fpirit by which 
it is dictated, I regard as a fophifm of the mod 
dangerous kind. Nothing could fooner reduce 
this country, to the deepeft poverty and diftrefs. 
"What is it, that has raifed this country to 
the ftate of affluence, eafe, and happinefs, ic 
has long enjoyed ? Not the natural fecundity 
of its lands : for, in that refpedl, it is very far 
inferior to many other countries. Neither our 
lands, their natural produce, nor the populouf- 
nefs of the country, could add one grain to its 
riches, without the induftry and labour of its 
people : I mean thofe, who not only labour 
for their maintenance and fupport, but alfo, 
for the neceflaries and conveniences of thofe, 
whofe circumftances enable them to pay for what 
they are unable or unwilling to provide for 

themfelves. 



432 Mr. Wtmpey on the Impropriety of allowing 

themfelves. It is the well- directed induftry of 
the labouring poor, which conftitutes the riches 
of a country. They are, when beneficially em- 
ployed, the true finews of its profperity ; to pro- 
mote and effecT: which, is the heighth of political 
wifdom. Numbers, unlefs ufefully employed, 
are the bane and curfe of every community. 

Nature, in the molt fertile foil, and climate, 
can only provide the rough materials ; it is the 
induftrious and laborious man, who cultivates 
the earth, reaps the grain, (hears the flock, 
fabricates the cloth, fells the timber, penetrates 
into the bowels of the earth, and navigates the 
feas. Upon the unremitting toil of thefe labo- 
rious people, do the riches, the profperity, and 
the happinefs of every populous country depend. 
A populous country, deftitute of employment 
for its people, would foon exhibit a dreadful fcene 
of wretchednefs and mifery. A people, ener- 
vated and difpirited for want of employment, 
and the means of a comfortable fubfiftence, to 
be procured by it alone, would foon become the 
fcourge and curfe of a country. 

But let us make the experiment; like fight- 
ing a battle, it will be much more fafe to 
do it on paper, than in the field. I am very 
far from pretending to have a perfect, or even 
a comprehenfive view of the fubjecl ; but, I 
hope, without vanity it may be faid, I have a 
practical knowledge of commerce, fufficient to 

enable 






a Bounty ', to encourage the Exportation of Corn: 43 3 

enable me to point out the inevitable ruin, 
that muft attend the fyftem of eftablifhing free 
ports, for the importation and exportation of 
all kinds of commodities without reftri&ion. 

I will beg leave to premife a few propofitions 
relative to this fubjecT, the certainty of which, 
I perfuade myfelf, will not be difputed. 

1. If the labour and induftry of a people are 
the fources of the riches they poffefs, thefe fources 
muft dry up or abate, in proportion as the peo- 
ple want employment. 

2. Both the land, and labour of England are 
very high, in comparifon with thofe of almoft any 
other country in Europe; confequently, fuch 
countries can under-fell England, ceteris paribus, 
both in corn and manufactures, in any market 
in the world. 

3. The produce of the earth, in its natural 
ftate, and raw materials of all kinds, have their 
value exceedingly increafed, by the fkill and 
labour bellowed upon them, in converting 
them into goods and wares, often in the pro- 
portion of, from five to twenty for one, and 
fometimes a great deal more : therefore, where 
there are people to be employed, and fuch goods 
and wares can be vended with advantage, it 
is extremely bad policy, to fufrer the raw mate- 
rials to be exported, on any pretence whatfoever. 

4. Mod countries have fome advantages pe- 
culiar to them, arifing from the foil, climate, 

Vol. I. F f fituacion, 



434 &&' Wimpey on the Impropriety of allowing 

fituation, or natural productions of the fame* 
The genuine and moft warrantable policy of 
any country is, to accommodate fuch advantages 
to the good, the well-being, and profperity of 
its people. Indeed, general policy renders it 
neceffary, to put every (late upon an equal foot- 
ing with its neighbours j for it would be deemed 
weaknefs or madnefs, to neglect local advan- 
tages, when every ftate, and every individual 
around us, were availing themfelves to the 
utmoft of their power, to profit by them. 

c. If the exportation of raw materials is fo 
impolitic a meafure; how much more fo is it, 
to encourage the manufactures of other nations, 
when they ftand in competition with our own, 
and have a direct tendency to fupplant us in 
our market at home, and in the confumption of 
our own manufactures, though infinitely better 
accommodated to the uncertain climate of 
Great Britain? This is moft unpatriotic, and,. 
to the laft degree, culpable. 

Now, fheep's wool is one of thofe peculiar 
local bleffings, with which Great Britain and 
Ireland are favoured, beyond any other part of 
Europe. Its quality is fuch, that every ounce 
of it is capable of being wrought into ufeful 
clothing of fome kind, which, it feems, is a 
rare and Angular cafe. The value of wool,, 
when wrought into cloth, upon an average, is 
reckoned to be in the proportion of, five or fix to 

one- 



a Bounty, to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 435 

one. The number of inhabitants is faid to be 
fomewhere from fix to feven millions, and that 
one third of thefe are faid to be employed and 
maintained by this manufacture. The proportion 
feems large; perhaps they are over-rated. Sup- 
pofe only a fixth of the people to be employed in 
this branch, the object is important, fo much 
fo, that the wifdom of the legislature has always 
thought ifneceffary to encourage this manu- 
facture by every means in its power. The 
queftion, it feems, is — "Have they judged and 
acled rightly ?" The grazier, perhaps, will tell 
you, no ; for if he were permitted to export his 
wool, he could fell it at double the price. This 
is very true, and would certainly be a great 
prefent advantage to him : but how long would 
it continue to be fo ? That, perhaps, he never 
thought of, nor of other confequences, which 
would certainly overbalance even his partial 
advantages. 

If it be true, as it is generally believed, that 
one pack of Englijh wool enables the French to 
work up two packs of theirs; and if labour in 
France is cheaper, by, at lead, one half, than in 
Englaiid, they could afford to give a milling 
for a pound of wool, that is now fold for fix- 
pence, and fell their cloth at little more than 
half the price — fay two thirds at mod — that 
an Englifo manufacturer could do. Where, then, 
mud we fend our cloth to market ? 

Ff 2 Bur 



436 Mr. Wimpcy on the Impropriety of allowing 

But it has been faid — If the French would give 
us a double price for our wool, and fupply us 
with cloth equally good, at two thirds of what 
we give for it now, that is, as good fuperfine 
cloth for twelve (hillings a yard as what we pay 
eighteen (hillings for now, and fo for other forts 
in 'proportion, is it not evident we fhould be 
very great gainers by the bargain ? I anfwer : 
labour and toil are generally the effects of 
neceflity, and not of choice. Few men would 
be at the pains of doing any difagreeable labour 
for themfelves and families, if they had any 
fure means of doing as well, or better, without 
it : but whatmuft the man do, who is deftitute 
of fuch means ? If he fhould fell his pound 
of wool to T. for a (hilling, which E. would 
only give him fix-pence for, would that enable 
him to give twelve (hillings, or fix (hillings, to 
T. for a yard of their cloth £ This is the true 
queftion; for at lead nine-tenths of the people, 
perhaps ninety-nine out of a hundred, muft 
earn their bread, and cloaths too, by their 
labour. It is not the cafe of the woollen 
manufactures only, but of almoft all manufac- 
turers and artificers whatever. It has been faid, 
if that branch fail, let them betake themfelves 
to fome other ! I (hould be happy to fee the 
man, who could point out the means of employ- 
ing a million of people beneficially, in any other 
branch whatever. 

The 



a Bounty, to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 437 

The linen manufacture comes the neareft to 
the woollen : and the weaver of the latter, might 
foon be brought to weave the former. But here 
you are under a fimilar dilemma : for not a 
piece could be made in Great Britain without 
great lofs, if foreign linens were not fubject to 
cuftoms, almoft equal to a prohibition. The 
linens of Silefia, Pomerania, Saxony, Poland, Ruffia, 
Flanders, and Holland, pay cufioms from eighteen 
to thirty, and upwards, per cent. ; and thofe of 
France are prohibited. If you turn to the filk 
manufacture, you are there protected and encou- 
raged by fimilar means. French filks are abfo- 
lutely prohibited : thofe of Italy pay too heavy 
a duty to be worn in common : the Eajl Indian 
are prohibited under very fevere penalties. 
Were it not for very heavy duties, and pro- 
hibitions, not a piece of any of thefe goods could 
be made here. 

Where then, (hall we find employment for fo 
many millions of people, who, upon the fcheme 
of a free trade and open ports, would be deprived 
of their ufual means of fubfiftence ? Our manu- 
factures of lace are upon the fame footing : 
black and blond filk laces are prohibited : thread 
lace pays a duty, upon low goods, of four or 
five hundred per cent. The final 1 wares of 
Harlem are under the fame predicament. Fil- 
letings, tapes, bobbins, threads of all kinds 
and denominations, pay duties from twenty to 

\* f 3 thirty 



43§ Mr. TVimpey on the Impropriety of allowing 

thirty per cent, and fome much more j and, 
notwithftanding all this, the EngliJJj manufacturer 
is often puzzled to fell goods in our market at 
home, upon terms equally low with the foreign 
manufacturer. 

From hence it is eafy to fee, that the laws of 
this country, refpecling commerce, are abfo- 
lutely neceffary to its very exiftence. Repeal 
the laws, open the ports, and invite all the 
world to a free correfpondence with you, and 
you, at one ftroke, deprive .millions of people 
of the means of fubfiftence. What will you do 
with them then? Maintain them you cannot; 
for the whole income of the lands bears but a 
fmall proportion to the amount of the produce 
of their labour. The plain anfwer is — Many 
would be hanged, more would be ftarved, and 
many more would emigrate into other countries, 
as they did formerly into this, in hopes of 
employment. 

The grazier, by this time too, would begin 
to feel the efTe&s of his error : for having no 
market to go to, but France, with his wool, 
and that being glutted, it is more than probable, 
he would fall fhort of the price he now fo much 
complains of at home. For wool, and corn, 
and all commodities whatever, are fubject to, 
and governed by the fame law. Every man, 
and every date, that is in want of any articles 
whatever, are ready to buy at a fair price: but 

the 



a Bounty, to encourage the Exportation of Corn, 439 
the feller muft fubmit to very difadvantageous 
terms, to prevail upon the buyer to purchafe 
a commodity, he has no occafion for, and knows 
not what to do with. 

1 would beg leave juft to mention, by way 
of iiluftration, that the grazier is now under 
the very fame predicament, that the farmer was 
near one hundred years ago. Wheat was then 
at little more than three (hillings a bufticl ; ex- 
portation was encouraged by a bounty to enhance 
i cs price. The experiment fucceeded, as it 
infallibly muft; and the very next year it was 
nearlv double. The grazier's hopes are equally 
weli founded. Were he permitted to export his 
wool, the price would immediately advance, 
not only for exportation, but for home confump- 
tion too | and were it not for the ruinous effects 
I have defcribed, the meafure would certainly 
be juft and politic. But if the price hereafter 
(hould, by any means, fall a penny or two pence 
a pound below what it is now, is it poffible to 
conceive, that this circumftance could encourage 
the grazier to inceafe the quantity ; or can we 
reconcile it to common fenfe, that a circum- 
ftance happening to a man, in any profeflion, 
by which he is a fufferer to a very confiderable 
amount, fhould animate him to extend and in- 
creafe his trade ? Yet this is the very argument 
ufed by the advocates of the bounty. A bounty, 
fay they, encouraged exportation; exportation 

F f 4 encourage^ 



44-0 Mr. Wimpey on the Impropriety of allowing 

encouraged the farmer to plant; and planting 
lowered the price ; the price is, therefore, lower 
than it was before the bounty took place ; the 
fall of price is owing to the bounty ; ergo, the 
fall of price encouraged the farmer to plant more 
corn ! But this is a fophifm, as dangerous as it 
is abfurd. 

Were it true, that the average price of wheat 
has been cheaper fince the bounty than it was 
before, it is clearly demonftrable, that could not 
be the caufe. From 1730 to 1750, there were 
twenty fuch years of plenty as were never known j 
confequently, the average price of thofe years 
was lower than was ever known before or fince. 
But it feems to have been forgotten, how necef- 
farily and how largely the price mull have been 
affected, by the great improvements which have 
been made in agriculture during the laft century. 
Clover, turnips, and potatoes, are fuch an acqui- 
fition, as ultimately, by means of general im- 
provement, affedb the price of all the produce 
of a farm. Potatoes alone contribute, in moft 
families, to lefien the confumption of bread ; and 
in dear times, in feveral counties, among the 
poor, they almoft totally fupply the ufe of it. It 
fcarcely admits a doubt, that this ufeful root 
alone has lowered the average price of wheat, at 
lead fix-pence a bufhel. 

What has occafioned the loud outcry of the 
fall of price in coarfe wool ? The very fame 

caufe, 



\ a Bounty , to encourage the Exportation of Corn. 441 

caufe, that would have lowered the price of corn, 
if exportation had not kept it up — that is — im- 
provements. In countries which have been 
drained, the lands inclofed, and the turnip-cul- 
ture adopted, the pafture has been amazingly 
increafed, and the fize of the fheep alfo : fo that 
a double quantity of wool has been raifed upon 
the fame extent of land, and the grazier would 
be nofufferer, though he mould fell for half the 
former price : for the lofs in quality is more than 
compenfated by the increafe in quantity. 



Oh 



442 Mr. White on the Natural Hifiory of the Cow. 



On the Natural History of the Cow, fo far as 
it relates to its giving Milk, f articular ly for the 
Use of Man. By C. White, Efq. F. R. S. 
&V. Read March 12, 1783. 

T^JATURALISTS feem to lay it down as a 
general principle, that neither animals, nor 
parts of animals, are primarily intended for the 
ufe of man, but are only capable of a fecondary 
application to his purpofes. It mull, however, 
be allowed that, in many inftances, the fecon- 
dary ufe is fo manifett and important, that it 
cannot, with propriety, be excluded from the 
orisinal defigns of the all wife Creator. And it 
appears to me, that the Cow in its faculty, of 
pivinti in fuch abundance, and with fo much 
eafe, its Milk, which forms fo excellent an arti- 
cle of aliment for the human fpecies, is a fbriking 
example of this fubordination to the iitereftsof 
mankind. For this animal differs in fome parts 
of its organization from moft others, having a 
larger and more capacious udder, and longer 
and thicker teats, than the largeft animal we 
know; and fhe has four teats, whilft all other 
animals of the fame nature, have but two. 

. She 



Mr. V/lnte on the Natural ffijlory of the Cow. 443 

She alfo yields the milk freely to the hand, 
whiift molt animals, at leafc thofe that do not 
ruminate in the fame manner, refufe it, except 
their own young, or fome adopted animal be 
allowed to partake. 

This is a fubje£t which, one would have thought, 
had long fince been exhaufted •, but I have not 
been able to find any thing fatisfactory in the 
few authors I have read. I mull confefs, indeed, 
that my knowledge in Natural Hiftory is very 
confined, and mould therefore wife to hear the 
fentiments of thofe learned Members of this 
Society, who have made the hiftory of nature 
their more particular fludy. 

In the fir ft place, the Cow is of that clafs of 
homed ruminating animals* which have cloven hoofs y 
four ftomachs, a confiderable length of intefiines, are 
furnifhed with fuet, and have no dentes incifores 
in the upper jaw. From the different flruclure 
of the fcomach in thefe creatures, a ruminant 
animal will be ferved with one- third lefs food, 
than another of equal bulk. Graziers are 
fufficiently acquainted with this. The reafon. 
is, that ruminating animals have many and 
ftrong digefcive organs ; and every thing capa- 
ble of being converted into chyle, is extracted 
from the food ; which therefore yields a greater 
quantity of milk: but a horfe's and .an afs's 
ftomach is not fitted for this j lb that they require 

a much 



444 Mr. White on the Natural Hijlory of the Cow. 

a much greater quantity of food to extract the 
fame nouriihment. 

A Cow's udder is fo capacious, that it frequent- 
ly contains ten quarts of milk, which it will 
yield twice a day ; and it is not only remarkable 
for its quantity, but its quality, as fome cows 
will afford twelve or fourteen pounds of butter 
in a week. The fize and form of the teats ap- 
pear, at the firft fight, as if they were made on 
purpofe for the hand to draw off the milk. But 
this is not the only advantage they poffefs i the 
thicknefs permits the lactiferous tubes to be of a 
larger diameter, and the length of them makes 
the fyphon fo much longer, and the extraction of 
the milk of courfe fo much more eafy. 

The cow having four teats is a ftriking peculi- 
arity, the number in all other animals, bearing 
fome proportion to the number of young ones,, 
they bring forth at a time, as in the bitch, the 
cat, the fow, &c. But the Cow does not bring 
forth, at a birth, more young ones, than thofe 
animals who have but two teats. 

The Cow will yield her milk to the hand as 
freely, and will continue to give her milk for 
as long a time, without any calf coming near 
her, as if it were permitted to fuck her con- 
ftantly. This is not the cafe with the afs, which, 
next to the Cow, is the animal we are moft 
accuftomed to have milked in this part of the 

world, 



Mr. White on the Natural Hijiory of the Cow. 445 

world. For it is well known, that an afs will 
foon grow dry, if her foal is not permitted to 
fuck part of the milk every day, but fhe is not 
a ruminating animal. 

The human milk cannot long be preferved 
in the breafts, without the child be permitted 
to fuck. It otherwife foon acquires a bad faltifh 
tafte, and, in a fhort time, leaves them entirely ; 
and this wiH happen, if the child alone fucks 
if it be not permitted to fuck four or five 
times a day. Three times a day I find is, in Ge- 
neral, not fufficient to keep the milk good, and 
in proper quantity. I do not mean to fay, that 
it is impoMible, in any fubjec! whatever, to keep 
the milk without a child fucking conftantly. 
I believe there have been inftances of fu&ion by 
perfons, above the age of infancy, and even by 
puppies, keeping the milk for fome time; but 
thefe may, in fome meafure, be confidered in 
the light of adopted children. What I would 
wifh to enforce is, that the mod dexterous and 
mod fkilful women, who draw breafts, do not 
keep the milk without the affiftance of the child ; 
and when I have particularly defired them to 
do it, they have not been able, though they have 
fwallowed the milk, and repeated the fu&ion 
four or five times a day. 

Capivaccius, it is faid, faved the only heir 
of a noble family by ordering him to lie between 

two 



446 Mr. White on the Natural Hi/lory of the Coitf. 

two nurfes, in the flower of their age, and fuck 
their breads. 

Foreftus tells us, that a youth at Bologna, of* 
twenty-nine years of age, labouring under a 
true marafmus, lived upon the milk of a beau- 
tiful young nurfe, of eighteen years of age, who 
lay in the fame bed with him, by which means 
his emaciated body was well reitored. In 
both thefe inftances, I fuppofe the milk was 
preferved, without the child being permitted 
to fuck. I am informed that goats, fheep, 
and rein deer will give milk freely to the 
hand, without the kid, lamb, and the fawn 
having accefs to them, but they are ru- 
minating animals of the fame kind with the 
Cow. 

Upon the whole, I believe we may infer, 
that the property of yielding milk, without the 
young one, or fome adopted animal, in fome 
meafure partaking of it, is confined to that clafs 
of ruminating horned animals who have cloven hocfs, 
four Jlomachs, long inteflines, are furnifhed with 
fuety and have no foreteeth in the upper jaw. 
That cows, Iheep, goats and deer are of this 
kind, and no others ; and that the Cow has this 
property in a more eminent degree than the 
others, owing to the capacioufnefs of her udder, 
and the fize, form and number of her teats. 
There are other ruminant animals, befides thofe 

1 have 



Mr. White on the Natural Hijlory of the Cow. 447 

1 have mentioned, fome of which are without 
horns or cloven feet, and without fuet; fome 
have only two, fome three flomachs, and fome 
are furnifhed with fore-teeth in the upper jaw j 
but I cannot learn that any of thefe are pofTeffed 
of the property I have mentioned. 

It may, perhaps, be faid, that the Tartars ride 
mares, upon their excurfions for plunder, in order 
to live upo-n the milk, and probably do not take 
their foals with them- But this will not difprove 
the doctrine I have advanced ¦, as the milk will 
. hardly defeit them in fo ihort a time, as one of 
thefe excurfions might laft. 

Is there not, therefore, fome reafon to conclude 
that the Cow was, by the omnifcient Author of 
nature, intended to give milk, particularly for 
the ufe of man ? 



On 



448 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hi/lory, &c. 



On the Natural History and Origin of 
Magnesian Earth, particularly as connected 
with thofe of Sea Salt, and of Nitre ; with 
Observations onjome of the Chemical Pro- 
perties of that Earth, which have been y 
hitherto, either unknown, or undetermined. By 
Thomas Henry, F. R. S. &c. 



J^ATURALISTS and Chemifts formerly 
*"^ divided the different kinds of earths into 
five genera, viz. the Siliceous, or Verifiable, the 
Calcareous, the Gypfeous, the Argillaceous and 
the Talcky. But recent difcoveries having proved 
the Gypfeous, to be a compound of Calcareous 
earth and vitriolic acid, and the Talcky, to con- 
fift of a mixture of Argillaceous with other earths, 
the genera were reduced to three. ' M. Baume 
has even attempted a farther reduction ; * and 
has endeavoured to prove, that two of thefe are 
merely modifications of the other: argillaceous 
earth being, according to him, a vitriolic fait, 

* Baume, Chymie Experimentale et Rationee, vol I. 
far la Terre. 

formed 



<f Magnefian Earth. 449 

Formed by the union of vitriolic acid with fili- 
ceous earth ; and the calcareous, a combination 
of the fame earth, with certain portions of air 
and water, effected by the operation of various 
marine animals: and he fuppofes, that when 
calcareous earth is deprived of air and water, it 
will return to its primitive ftate, viz. that of fili- 
ceous earth. 

This theory is, perhaps, rather fanciful, than 
juft. The operations of Nature, it mud be 
allowed, are generally firnple — but we may fim- 
plefy too far; and, in forming fyftems, we fbould 
not fuffer our imaginations to carry us beyond 
thofe bounds, which our fenfes, and experiment, 
warrant. 

Calcareous earth, indeed, in the form in which 
we commonly find it, is a compound, confiding 
of earth, air, and water; and is not confidered 
as pure, till it be deprived, by fire, of the two 
kft elements. It is then, properly, pure calcare- 
ous earth j but it does not appear that longer cal- 
cination, though it may divert it of fome of the 
properties of calcareous, will ever reduce it to the 
nature of filiceous earth. 

Every earth with which we meet, and which, 
when feparated from thofe acids, or other 
accidental bodies, that are combined with it, 
refifls every power we poffefs, to produce any 
farther decompofition, and yet differs in all, or 
any of its properties, from the other known 
Vol. I. G g earths, 



4'0 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hijiory, &c. 

earths, may be admitted to form a new genua, 
And, on thefe grounds, two new genera have 
lately been added to the other three. The bafis 
of fome fpars, * which had been generally deem-"- 
ed to be calcareous earth, has been proved 
to differ from it, in its affinities and fome other 
properties ; and has been admitted to form a 
diftinft genus, under the title of Barytic or Pon- 
derous Earth : and another kind of earth, which, 
though rarely, if ever, found pure in nature, yet 
abounds, in great quantities, in various forms of 
combination, from which it may be feparated by 
chemical means, has been allowed to form a 
fifth genus, under the appellation of Muriatic* 
or, Magnefian Earth. 

This earth was alfo, for fome time, con- 
founded with calcareous earth, of which it was 
fuppofed to be a modification ; for by the earlier 
modes of obtaining i:, it was mixed with fuch 

* r. Marmor Metallicum, Crofift. 182. Gypfum Spa- 
thofum, Spathum Fufibile, Margraf. Sec. Terra ponde- 
Tofa vitriolata. Bergman. Sciagrapbia Ponderous Spar. 

2. Marmor Metallicum, Cronjledt Min. § 18. B. Calk 
or Cauk. 

3. Gypfum cryftallifatum capillare, Cronjledt. Min. 
§ 19. B. Radiated Cauk. 

4. This earth has been alfo found of a fparry appearance, 
and combined with aerial acid only ; Terra ponderofa a'erata. 
See Dr. Withering's Experiments and Qbferiiations on the 
Terra Ponderofa. Phil. Tranf. vol LXX1V. p. 293. 

a quantity 



of Magnefian Earth. 451 

& quantity of calcareous matter as to difguife 
its diftinguifhing features, and even make it 
afiume fome of the characteristics of calcareous 
earth. But the accurate experiments of Mefirs. 
Black and Margraaf, foon removed the obstacles, 
which impeded our more perfect: acquaintance 
with its nature, and they procured it pure from 
the mixture of other earths; in which ftate they 
found it fc different, from what it had been re- 
prefented, that it was declared to be an earth, 
Jui generis. But though Dr. Black went thus 
far, he did not proceed to fet it at the head of 
a diftinct genus ; but placed it, with all thofe 
earths, which he has claffed together, under the 
general generic head of Abjorbent Earths, of which 
he was content to make this a fpecies. It has 
fince obtained a more honourable rank, and forms 
a feparate genus. 

M. Fourcroy, who follows the arrangement of 
his predeceflbr M. Bouquet, has placed calca- 
reous, ponderous, and magnefian earths amono- 
the falts. There (hould feem to be ftron» ob- 
jections to this arrangement, even with refpect: 
to the two former ; though their being fapid, 
and foluble in water, may give fome counte- 
nance to it. But the infipidity and total infolu- 
bility of pure magnefia, together with its not 
being fufible, by the ftrongeft heat we can apply, 
as will prefently be fhewn, are proofs of its being 
a real earth. 

G g 2 Though 



E, * J.MVU51 



452 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hijlory, &c. 

Though magnefian earth is rarely found pure, 
in nature, it is contained, in a (aline form, in all 
nitre heaps, from the mother ley of which fair, 
it was formerly extracted ; in the water of feveral 
medicinal fprings, and even in our common 
wells. But the fea is the great fource from 
which we obtain it ; in the waters of which, it 
is united to the marine acid, in which form it 
remains, after the cryftallifation of the fea fait, 
and is afterwards feparated from the marine, and 
united to the vitriolic, acid, by a particular pro- 
cefs. It is then called Sal Catharticus Amarus, 
and, from this fait, the magnefian earth may 
be precipitated. One hundred parts of the fait 
yield, on precipitation by a mild alkali, forty- 
two of magnefia, united with aerial acid. If 
a cauftic alkali be employed, the product 
amounts to only twenty-five parts. But a por- 
tion of this laft may be driven off by calcination, 
and confifts of water, and, perhaps, fome aerial 
acid, for it is difficult to procure the alkali quite 
free from that gas. The Magnefia is then faid 
to be ¦pure. One hundred parts offal catharticus 
amarus contain only nineteen of pure Magnefia, 
and according to Bergman, thirty- three of vi- 
triolic acid, and forty-eight of water. But 
Mr. Kirwan, who reckons only on the real 
acid, makes the proportion of acid twenty-four, 
and of water fifty- feven, parts. 

Sir 



Of Magnefian Earth. 453 

Sir. T. Bergman relates, * that he procured a 
fait, fimilar to the fal catharticus amarus, by 
lixiviating the earthy matters, feparated by wattl- 
ing from the filver ore of Sahlberg, on the 
furface of which the fait forms, by expofure to 
the air. One hundred weight of the earth 
yielded fixty-five pounds of this fait. M. Mon- 
net, alfo, difcovered a kind of Schiftus, which 
on calcination, and lixiviation, furnifhed a fmall 
portion of the fame fait. 

Magnefian earth may alfo be feparated, by 
means of vitriolic acid, from fome fpars, mar- 
bles, and other earthy and ftony bodies of which 
it forms a component part. 

The compound fpar, defcribed by Mr. 
Woulfe, f contains, in 100 parts, 60 of mil'd 
calcareous, 35 of mild Magnefia, and 5 of iron. 

One hundred parts of Creutzenwald (tone 
contain 12 of mild Magnefia. 

The Kolmord marble, the Pietra Talchina, the 
Verde Antico, and the Griotte, a red marble from 
Autun, all contain fmall portions of Magnefia. 

The Spuma Maris, an earthy fubftance, from 
which the Turkey tobacco-pipes are made, is 
faid to confift of equal parts of magnefian, and 
filiceous, earths. 

* Bergman de Magnefia. 

| Phil. Tranf. vol. LXIX. p. 29. 

Ggj Steatite, 



454 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hi/lory, &c 

Steatite, or Soap-rock, contains, according to 
Sir T. Bergman, 17 of mild Magnefia in 100 
parts of that compound. 

A loofe earth, found in Silefia, and defcribed 
by Margraaf, contains 1 of its weight of 
Magnefia. 

Fibrous Afbeftos contains, in 100 parts, 
from 12 to 28, and, Coriaceous Afbeftos, 
from 22 to 26 parts of magnefian earth, 
united, to aerial acid. Amianthus affords 
18, 6, Lapis Nephriticus 33, and Venetian 
Talc, an undetermined number of parts of the 
fame earth. 

Colourlefs Mica affords, on analyfis, 20 parts, 
in 100, blue Schiftus 8, black Horn/lone 16, and 
Killas 6 parts of Magnefia. 

Magnefia is alfo contained, in fmall quantity, 
in Chryfopathium, Felt-Spar, Schoerl, and Ba- 
faltes : and Pumice-ftone yields of it, from 6 
to 15 parts in 100. 

A martial muriatic fpar, found by M. Monnet, 
at St. Marie aux Mines, and, by him, named 
Pifolites, is conftituted of 50 parts of Silex, the 
remaining parts confiding of mild Magnefia and 
Iron, the proportions of which are not de- 
termined. * 

Such are the compounds under which mag- 
nefian ear.h is principally found ; and I havq 

* Vide Kirwan's Elements of Mineralogy, paflim. 

collected 



of Magnefian Earth. 455 

eolle&ed them under one view, as it may be 
ufeful to fome artifts, particularly thofe con- 
cerned in the potteries, to know what earths 
and ftones contain it, and in what proportions. 
Magnefia, as prepared for the (hops, would be 
too expenfive for the purpofes of manufactures, 
which may perhaps, often, be equally anfwered 
by ufing it in thefe combined forms. 

It may feem extraordinary, that a fubftance, 
fo plentifully diffufed in a ftate of combination, 
fhould fo rarely occur pure. * But the cafe is the 
fame, as the celebrated Bergman has obferved, 
with Clay, which is always found, in nature, com- 
bined with other fubftances. f Siliceous earth 
is indeed, fometimes, found pure in the form of 
Rock Cryjial; but Bergman detected fmall por- 
tions of both argillaceous and calcareous earth, 
in the fpecimens which he examined. Ponde- 
rous earth is generally combined with vitriolic 
acid, and the mod pure ftate, in which it has 
been obferved, is its combination with aerial 



* I have been affured by Mr. Fabroni, that Magnefia 
has been found pure, in the Pyrenees. This, however, 
was, probably, not pure, in the prefent acceptation of the 
term ; but pure from any other admixture, than that of 
aerial acid, for which magnefian earth has a ftrong 
attraction. 

f Clay, commonly fo called, does not, in general, con- 
tain more than from twenty-five to forty-eight parts, in 
jne hundred of pure argillaceous earth. 

Q g 4 acid. 



456 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hijiory, &c. 

acid. Calcareous earth has indeed been dis- 
covered, in the neighbourhood of Bath, in the 
(late of quicklime, though, probably, not 
wholly diverted of aerial acid. But they are all 
more frequently found combined with other 
fubftances, forming faline compounds, or, one 
or more, mechanically mixed with each other, 
constituting fpecies and varieties. 

The late Dr. Lewis, has confidered the earth 
which is obtained from vegetables, after in- 
cineration, and wafhing, as of the fame nature 
with Mao-nefia: and if we endeavour to trace 
the origin of magnefian earth, it may appear 
not improbable that, as all calcareous earth is 
the refultof the deftruction of teftaceous animals, 
fo the magnefian arifes from vegetables, which 
have periflied, and undergone fome procefs 
in the great laboratory of nature; whereby 
they are reduced to this Mate. By putrefaction 
they are altered to a fine black Mold. And it 
may be that, Nature, who often operates by 
flow and fecret fteps, may make fuch further 
changes, as to convert this Mold into mag- 
nefian earth. 

But the origin of magnefian earth is fo con- 
nected with that of fea fait, which it always 
accompanies, that it may not be improper to 
confider them together j as it is probable that 
they are both formed under fimilar cixcumftances, 
and at the fame time. 

Philofopher$ 



tof Magnefian Earth, 457 

Philofophers have been much puzzled to 
account for the original faltnefs of the Sea. 
Some have imagined it muft have been furnifhed 
by rivers, which flowing from the land, con- 
veyed with them fuch quantities of fait, from 
accumulations of that mineral, formed within 
the bowels of the earth, as to communicate, 
and continually fupply faltnefs to the Sea; while 
others have attributed its impregnation to rocks 
of fait, fituated at the bottom of the Ocean. To 
both thefe opinions, objections have been made j 
and the learned Bifliop of Landaff, * has chofen 
to adopt another, viz. that the Sea was originally 
created fait. In fupport of this theory, and in 
objection to the others, efpecially to that which 
afferts the origin and fupply from the land, 
it has been advanced, that a great part of the 
finny inhabitants of the ocean cannot exift in 
frefh water, and therefore it is not to be fup- 
pofed, that they mould ever have been placed 
in a fituation unfuited for their fupport. It 
might alfo have been added, that, there is as 
much difficulty in accounting for the orio-j n of 
the fait, which the rivers are fuppofed to wafh 
down, as for its formation in the Sea. But 
might not the great Creator, by whole Fiat 
all things were produced, accommodate the firfl 
inhabitants of the Sea to their temporary 

* Watfon's Chemical EJTays, vol. II. 

fituation ; 



45 3 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hi/lay, &fr. 

fituationj and gradually produce fuch changes 
in their conftitutions, as to make the faltnefs 
of the water neceffary to their fupport ? Changes, 
equally great, appear to have taken place in 
the human habit. The duration of life, in 
particular, was protracted, in the earlier ages, 
to a length convenient for the fpeedy population 
of the world ; and when that end was accom- 
plifhed to a certain degree, Providence afiigned 
limits to the exiftence of mankind, at the utmoft 
of which we feldom arrive, and beyond which 
we never pafs. 

Notwithftanding what I have here advanced, 
I muft confefs myfelf inclined to join in the 
opinion, that the Sea was originally created fait. 
But all faline fubrtances, with which we are 
acquainted, are fubje£t to gradual decay, de- 
compofition, or volatilization, in long procefs 
of time, and when expofed to the a&ion of air, 
moifture and heat. Nature has eftablifhed an 
univerfal fyftem of alternate destruction and 
recompofition in her works ; and is continually 
carrying on proceffes in her grand laboratory, 
which art is unable to imitate. Animals and 
vegetables perifh and decay ; and, when 
corrupted, contribute to the fupport or ac- 
commodation of each other ; and many mineral 
fubftances, though more permanent than thofp 
which conftitute the other kingdoms, are liable 

tq 



Of Magnefmn Earth. 459 

to confiderable changes, are frequently de- 
compofed, and forced to enter into new com- 
binations. It is not therefore to be fuppofed* 
that the fame individual fale has been contained 
by the ocean, from the creation to the prefent 
time. We know that the waters are continually 
evaporating into the atmofphere, forming 
clouds, defcending again in rain, replenilhing 
the earth, and after forming rivers, returning 
to the fea. Sea fait riles, by a moderate heat, 
with the vapour of water, and is often carried by 
ftorms to confiderable diftances. By thefe and 
other means, it is probable, there muft be a con- 
tinual wafte of fait, which Nature muft have fome 
mode to fupply. 

The ocean is replete with animals and plants.' 
The deftruction and corruption of thefe muft 
furnifh much matter, fitted for the formation 
of faline fubftances, much earth, much of the 
principle of inflammability, and of air; and, if 
water were not a part of their compofition, 
the fea would plentifully fupply that elementary 
ingredient. By the putrefaction of fimilar fub- 
ttances, mixed with calcareous earth, moiftened 
with water, and expofed to the gradual action 
of the air, Nitre is formed. May not the fame 
fubftances, under different circumftances, 
covered by the depth of the ocean, and feparated 
hereby from immediate communication with 
the air, produce Sea-Salt. It has lately been 

difcovered 



460 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hijtory, &V. 

difcovered, by an ingenious chemift,* that 
though Nitre is produced by the above fubftances, 
with the accefs of air, yet if they be fo placed 
that the air may be excluded, and the fituation 
perhaps not too moift, Sulphur, and not Nitre, 
is the refult. So that the three mineral acids 
jhould feem to have a fimilar origin, and it is not 
without good grounds, that they are faid to be 
modifications of each other. 

But it may be faid, that the analogy in the 
production of Sea-Salt and of Nitre is not com- 
plete. That, in the one, both the alkaline and 
acid parts of the fait are formed; whereas, in the 
other, the acid only is produced in the beds, 
and it is necelTary to add an alkaline fait to 
conftitute the bafis of the Nitre. I cannot how- 
ever allow of the force of this objection. Though 
the addition of the alkali be necelTary, in thefe 
northern latitudes, yet, in warmer climates, 
where Nature is more vigorous and adive, there 
is no doubt but ihe forms, or devellopes, both 
the acid and alkali of Nitre, at the fame time. 

* M. Fougeroux. vide Memoirs del ' Academie Royale 
des Sciences pour l'annee 1780. 

The Sulphur, produced under the above circumftances, 
was found, amidft the ruins of an old houfe which had 
been built in a very filthy place, contained in a mafs of 
earth, and, in part cryftallized ; and conftituting, in 
feveral of the la.ge portions of the earth, a .third of the 
whole mafs. 

To 



of Magnefian Earth. 46 r 

To the evidence adduced by Dr. Wall, in his 
ingenious paper, on the origin of the Fixed Vege- 
table Alkali, and of Nitre, I have to add that of 
Baron Dillon, the intelligent translator of Mr.- 
Bowles's Travels in Spain, who has, perfonally, 
afTured me of the authenticity of the fact ; and 
of a Gentleman who refided, during feveral 
years, in the Eaft Indies, as Superintendent of 
the manufactures of the Company, and fully 
confirms the account, that Nitre is procured, 
from the foil of certain places in that country, 
merely by lixiviating it, and evaporating the 
water, without the addition of any alkaline fait. 
The Duke de Rouchefoucauld alfo obtained one 
ounce of nitre in the pound, from chalk of 
Roche Guyon : and it is faid, by M. Fourcroy, 
to be found quite pure in chalk beds. 

Indeed the relation between the produdlion 
of thefe two falts is very Striking ; for at the fame 
time that Nitre is formed in the beds, a con- 
siderable quantity of Common Salt feems to be 
produced; and, during the evaporation of the ni= 
trous ley, fuch quantities of it are feparated, that 
¦we cannot fuppofe the whole to have pre-exiSted 
as fuch, in the urine and other animal matters, 
ufed in the nitre heaps, but mud regard it, in 
fome meafure, as a new product. 

Nor does the analogy Slop here. Together 
with the Nitre, which is formed in the beds, 
and with the Sea-Salt, which we fuppofe to be 

formed 



462 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hiftory, csV. 

formed in the ocean, another fait confifting of 
marine acid and magnefian earth, is always pro- 
duced, or, at leaft, is always found mixed with 
thefe, and is left in the mother ley, remaining 
after their cryftallifation. It mould feem, there- 
fore, highly probable, that Nature, at one and 
the fame time, fabricates from the conftituent 
parts of animal and vegetable fubftances, noc 
only the alkaline and acid faks, but the mild 
and taftelefs earth of Magnefia — and that this 
earth is the refult of the decompofition of vege- 
tables, whofe other component parts, combining 
with animal matters with which they meet, 
and aided by the concurrence of air, water, 
and heat, conftitute the different acids and al- 
kalis, neceffary to the formation of Sea-Salt and 
of Nitre. * 

Meffrs. 



* M. Baume is of opinion that the conftituent parts of 
fixed alkaline fait, are calcareous earth, water, and 
phlogifton: and he aflerts that he has produced this fait, 
by calcining together equal portions of powdered marble, 
and the charcoal of oil of hartfhorn ; and that the quantity 
of fait was always diminifhed by a diminution of the 
inflammable matter, employed in the experiment. He 
attempts to account for the formation of faline fubftances, 
in the humid way, in the following manner. " Les 
teftacees croilfent ct periftent dans la mer. La Nature, 
par le movement des eaux, brife et reduit en poudre 
impalpable beaucoup de coquiiles de ces animaux, et met 
la terre calcaire en etat d'etre diffoute par 1' eau. L' eau 

de 



Of Magnefian Earth. 463 

MefJfrs. Black and Margraaf, and particularly 
the former, have thrown great light on the Che- 
mical Hiftory of Magnefian Earth. The Eflay 
of the former, in particular relates a number of 
experiments made in the moft accurate manner, 
and of deductions the moft clear and fatisfaclory, 
of any treatife extant. An eflay the more valu- 
able, as befides the difcrimination of that earth 
from the Calcareous, it has laid the foundation 
of the many valuable difcoveries relative to the 
nature of fixed air and the various Gafes, which 
have been the fources of the moft valuable im- 
provements in Chemiftry. Happy I mult efteem 
myfelf if, following fuch great mafters, I have 
been able to add any new or ufeful information.* 

The 

de la ftier diflbut de meme la matiere inflammable, non 
feulement des corps dont nous parlons, mais de tous les 
corps organifes qui croiflent et peri/Tent dans Ton fein: 
die elabore a fon gre la matiere inflammable, et la reduit 
dans la etat convenable pour former differentes matieres 
falines. De cette union il refulte differentes fels, fuivant 
l'etat des fubftances, et les proportions dans lefquelles ces 
fubftances fe font combinees. Je penfe que les fels 
contenant de l'acide vitriolique et ceux contenant de 
l'acide marin, font les fels que la nature forme le plus 
abondamment dans la mer; ils font, Tun et l'autre, des 
fels primtifs. Chymie Experimentale et Raifonnee 

vol. I. p. 205. 
• The principal improvements, which I ventured to 
fugged, in Dr. Black's procefs for preparing Magnefia 
Alba ; thofc, I mean of employing a larger quantity of 

water, 



464 -frfr* Henry on the Natural Hijfory, &c. 

The late Sir Torbern Bergman has purfued 
the fubjedr. with great fuccefs. He has fatisfac« 
torily explained fome of the phenomena of the 
procefs for the preparation of Magnefia ; has 
afcertained its affinities with all the acids, to 
many of which Dr. Black had not extended his 
inquiry, and defcribed the Salts formed by their 
union with this bafis. And he has given an 
account of the refult of various experiments, 
made with a view of determining the degrees of 
fufibility, which Magnefian Earth exhibits, 
when expofed to a ftrorig heat, either mixed with 
other earths, or per ft * 

water, for the firft warning, and of throwing the mixture, 
of the Saline Liquors, into boiling water, and continuing 
the codtion, inftead of boiling the mixture, previous to the 
addition of the water, have been adopted, in the later 
editions of the Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia. 

* This excellent Chemift has done me the honour to 
quote my difcoveries relative to the difference of the 
'fepticity of Magnefia Alba, when applied to flefh and to 
bile ; and fubjoined my name in a marginal note to the 
paflage. He then proceeds, in the next paragraph, to 
cite the antifeptic properties in both cafes of Calcined 
Magnefia, and its power of rendering refinous fubftances 
foluble in water, in which paffage he has ufed my own 
words. Yet M. Fourcroy, and after him, his tranflator 
Mr. Elliot, have mentioned M. Bergman, only, as the 
relater of the latter facts, without noticing the author 
from whom he had taken them. My Effay was publiihed 
in May, 1773, whereas the date of that of Sir Torbern 
Bergman, which like moil of his other excellent Tracts, 
was written as a Thefis for one of his Pupils, is Decem- 
ber 23, 1774. 

Magnefia, 



cf Magnefia Earth. 465 

Magnefia, fays M. Bergman, expofed to a 
long continued, and very violent fire, aggluti- 
nates and begins to fhew figns of fufion, efpe- 
cially if the Magnefia has been prepared, by 
calcination, from the mother leys'. Mon. Dar- 
cet, on the contrary, had averred, that the earthy 
toafis of Epforn Salt refitted the action of a fire 
equal, in continuance and force to that of a 
Porcelain furnace. And M. Macquer, in the 
new edition of his Chemical Dictionary, declares, 
that he has expofed the Earth of this Salt to 
the greateft heat, that could be formed in the 
focus of M. de Trudaine's large lens, without 
the leaft appearance of a tendency to fufion. 
M. Morveau had operated on Magnefia fepa- 
rated from the mother ley of Nitre, and had 
concluded it to be, not only in Ui'df, the molt 
fufible of all earths, but that it even decided the 
fufion of other earths. ¦ But on making his expe- 
riments with Magnefia, precipitated from Epfom 
Salt, he found, that on feparately expofing two 
Heffian crucibles, the one containing Chalk, and 
the other an equal portion of Magnefia, to the 
ftrongeft degree of heat, that could be produced 
in M. Macquer's furnace, the chalk was fufed into 
a beautiful tranfparent glafs, and had attacked 
and dilfolved the crucible, for more than half 
its thicknefs, wherever the Calcareous Earth had 
reached. But the Magnefia was formed into 
a round, white, opake, folid, mafs, not having 
the appearance even of the femivitrification of 

Vol.. I. H h Porcelain, 



466 Mr. Henry on the Natural HiJlory y &c. 

Porcelain, and without the lead adhefion to the 
crucible.* 

This experiment feems to coincide with that 
of Bergman, but to differ, in fome degree, from 
that related by Macquer. Mr. Magellan, whom 
we have very defervedly - ranked among our 
honorary members, has lately favoured me with 
an account of fome curious experiments, made 
in London, which may lerve to clear up this 
point. 1 ftiall therefore comply with his requeft 
to lay an extract of his letter before the Society; 
and then beg leave to add a few remarks on the 
fubjecT:, and on fome other of the chemical pro- 
perties of Magnefian Earth, which are either un- 
known or undecided. 

" I "have a fact," fays Mr. Magellan, " to 
« c relate, which may be agreeable to you, con- 
(C cerning the portion of Calcined Magnefia you 
l( favoured me with. On my return to London, 
(C many experiments were making with a moft 
" powerful burning lens, executed by Mr. 
" Parker. Among thefe, was a very ftriking one, 
<c which puzzled me much, made with Calcined 
" Magnefia, caked, by preflure, into a cubic 
?_' form, of i of quarter of an inch per fide^ 
" This, expofed to the focus of the lens, wa$ 
" reduced from 7V0 to r-Su on* each fide of the 
«* cube. On hearing this I was ftruck with the 
" fact, which is contrary to the known property 

* Opufculcs Chymiques et Phifiqucs de M. T. Berg- 
man, traduits par M. de Morveau, tome. I, p. 398. 

" of 



Of Miignefian Earth. 467 

tf of Magnefia, viz. of not changing its dimen- 
*' fions, nor receiving any alteration in its con- 
u fiftence, by the ftrongeft heat. I therefore 
** went, the firft fair day, to the place where 
" the lens was at work, carrying with me the 
* c very fame bottle with which you favoured me. 
,c I made a fimiiar cube of your Magnefia, with- 
" in the fame metallic box that had been ufed 
" in the former cafe ; but 1 found that, by ex- 
<f pofing it, even for a longer time, to the force 
" of the lens, than the other Magnefia had been, 
" this of yours was not fenfibly diminifhed in 
" bulk, nor did it become harder, as the other 
<c had done, which muft have had a confiderable 
" portion of Argillaceous or Siliceous Earth in 
" its compofition, to occafion it to fhrink irl 
" fuch a manner. I was told it was bought of 
cc a very good and reputable Chemift. But, very 
Cc probably, he may precipitate his Magnefiaj 
" with uncryftallifed Tartar, or with any other 
" Alkali, whereas Bergman prefers the vola- 
" tilf^. Or, perhaps, cryftallifcd Tartar has 
fC always fome filiceous or other earthy fnb- 
tc ftance, which, mingling with the Magnefia, 
*' prevents its adhering to its fpecific character. 
" 1 wifh to know whether I am right iqj this way 
14 of accounting for the difference; for as I am 
,c now preparing for the prefs, a fecond edition 
lc of Cronftedt's Mineralogy, I wifh the facl to 
* c appear in its true and proper light." — So far 
Mr. Magellan. 

H h 2 It 



468 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hijlory, (Jc. 

It is very probable that the Magnefia, ufecf 
in the experiments of MefTrs. Bergman and 
Morveau, was pure, as the former recommends, 
and the latter actually employed, the Volatile 
Alkali, to effect the precipitation of the earth. 
The difference, therefore, between their experi- 
ments and that of M. Macquer, mod probably 
depended on the communication of fome portion 
of Siliceous or Argillaceous Earth, from the 
crucible in which they were made. Whereas 
M. Macquer's experiments, being made in a 
metallic box, and the heat directed immediately 
to the Magnefia, no tendency to vitrification 
would appear. 

In regard to the difference between the 
Magnefia, which was firfl: expofed to Mr. 
Parker's lens, and my own, 1 can only fpeak 
from conjecture. I have been particularly care- 
ful to have my Alkaline Lixivium, which is, 
a folution of the fineft pot aft, perfectly purified : 
and have frequently obferved, that after it has 
been freed from all Neutral Salts, and from all 
the earthy matter, that the filter could feparate, 
the folution, on long (landing, has become 
again turbid, and depofited a copious white 
fediment. Bergman, who defcribcs a fimilar 
fediment declares it to be Siliceous Iiarth, 
that had been held in folution by the Alkali, 
and is precipitated by the fixed air, attracted by 
the fait. This fact is adduced by him, as a 

proof 



of Magnefian Earth. 469 

a proof of the acidity of that gas. Perhaps the 
ingenious Chemift, who prepared the other por- 
tion of Magnefia, not adverting to this circum- 
ftance, or juftly not confidering it as materially 
affe&ing the medicinal properties of the Magnefia, 
though it would greatly alter its chemical quali- 
ties, might have ufed his Lixivium, foon after 
filtration, and, by this means, the extraneous 
Earth might have been introduced into the 
Magnefia, and have affected its fufibility. 

Dr. Black had faid, in his excellent EfTay on 
Quicklime and Magnefia, that Calcined Mag- 
nefia, diffolves in the vitriolic, nitrous, marine, 
and acetous acids, and forms with them Salts, 
fimilar to thole produced by the uncalcined 
earth with the fame acids. But Mr. Monch, 
a German apothecary, has afierted, that though 
he poured half an ounce of ftrong vinegar on 
twenty grains of Calcined Magnefia, and fuf- 
fered the mixture to (land for twenty-four hours, 
only feven grains of the Magnefia were difiblved ; 
and that he was unable to diiTolve more than 
the fame quantity, by digefting, in a moderate 
heat, an equal portion of Calcined Magnefia, 
in half an ounce of a mixture confifting of one 
part of ftrong vitriolic acid and fix of water, for 
twenty hours. And, what is ftill more extraor- 
dinary, he could diiTolve only nine grains out 
of twenty by boiling for a confiderable time, 
jn an ounce of the fame diluted acid. But in 

H 3 the 



4/0 Mr. Henry on the Natural Hiftory, &c. 

the nitrous and concentrated marine acids, he 
acknowledges, they diflblved entirely.* 

Mr. Kirwan, alfo fays,f that this earth, per- 
fectly dry and free from fixed air, could not be 
difiblved in any of the acids without heat. But 
that in a heat of i8o°. thefe acids, diluted with 
four or fix times their quantity of water, at- 
tacked it very fenfibly. There is no doubt but 
Calcined Magnefia difiblves much lefs rapidly 
than the mild. The aerial acid, contained in 
the latter, while it is expeliing, keeps up, as 
Bergman has juftly obferved, an intefiine motion, 
whereby the particles of the earth are agitated 
and feparated, fo that frefh furfaces are con- 
tinually prefented to the Magnefia. Whereas, 
if an acid be added to this earth, when diverted 
of air, this motion is wanting, and that part 
of the acid, which becomes faturated with the 
earth, envellopes the remaining earth, and pre- 
vents the immediate action of the free acid on 
it.J Continual agitation, however, will greatly 
promote the folution. 

Mr. Monch, feems not to have J}een aware 
of the greater quantity of acid, requifite to 
diflblve Calcined Magnefia, than would be 
neceffary for the uncalcined. Nor indeed to 

** Vide London Medical Journal, vol. III. p. 97. 
•f Philosophical Tranfa&ions, vol. LXXII. p. 193. 
I EergmanOpufc. de Magnefia. § XIX. 

have 



of Magneftan Earth. 47 1 

have known the quantity required for the 
folution of the latter. 1 have found twenty 
grains of mild Magnefia require an ounce and 
half of diftilled vinegar for its folution. This 
may feem a large quantity ; but let it be re- 
membered that, " the quantity of each bafis, 
" requifite to faturate a given quantity of each 
" acid, is, directly as the affinity of fuch acid 
<c to each bafis."* 100 grains of real vitriolic 
acid require 215 of vegetable fixed alkali 
to neutralife them j whereas the fame portion 
of acid would be neutralifed by 80 grains of 
Magnefia j and the proportional quantity of this 
earth to that of the alkali, necefiary to faturate a 
given quantity of acetous acid, would be itill 
fmaller. 

But Mr. Kirwan's experiments are more worthy 
of attention. His accuracy in every thing he 
undertakes is undeniable; nor would he pro- 
bably have erred, but in a cafe in which the 
moft faithful Experimentalift might be liable 
to deception. 

I do not know any thing more fubjecl to 
variety than the folubility of pure Magnefia 
in acids. I have difTolved \i grains of aerated 
Magnefia in lufficient quantities of each of 
the four principal acids, when I have found the 
earth neutralifed. Five grains of pure Magnefia, 
which is equal to twelve of the aerated has 

• Kirwan in Phil. Tranf. vol. LXXIH. p. 38. 

H 4 dllTolved, 



472 Mr. Henry en the Natural Hijiory, &c. 

diffolved, without heat, in the fame quantity 
of the vitriolic, and even with fmaller quantities 
of the nitrous and marine acids, than were 
neceflary for the fclution of the aerated. The 
action of the acetous acid was fomewhat lefs 
complete, on the pure than on the aerated. The 
acids were previoufly diluted with about five 
times their weight of water, except the acetous 
which was concentrated, and the Magnefian 
Earth was intimately mixed with half an ounce 
of water, and continually agitated with a glafs 
tube, till the folution was finifhed. 

Thus I have often made complete folutions 
of pure Magnefia. But at other times I have 
found it obftinately to refift folution, though 
prepared, previous to calcination, in every 
refpedl:, fimilar to the other, and, though, ap- 
parently, perfectly calcined. This for fome 
time puzzled me exceedingly; till *at laft I dis- 
covered it to depend on the (late of calcination, 
and that by continuing the fire for a longer time, 
this infoluble Magnefia acquired its cufromary 
folubjlity. Another circumftance, attending the 
calcination of Magnefia, I have always been un- 
able to explain. In a certain perk d of the 
procefs, though the Magnefia were ever fo tafle- 
lefs before calcination, and though it, at this 
time, (hews ro effervefcence with acids, yet it 
has acquired a difagreeable, bitter, pungent 
tafte, fomewhat refembling lime. But it does 
liot, like lime, or Magnefia containing that earth, 

form 



of Magnefian Earth. 473 

form a lime-water. This obnoxious tafte is alfo 
deftroyed by a further extenfion of the calcina- 
tion. On what can this property depend? 

Magnefia has been defcribed as throwing out 
a phofphoric light, in the latter periods of the 
calcination. This is a phenomenon which nei- 
ther I, nor any of the perfons I have employed, 
in the calcination of Magnefia, have ever been 
able to obferve. Indeed I do not fee how it 
could happen, except the Magnefia contained 
vitriolic acid or alkaline fait. M. Fourcroy, 
who mentions the facl, cites the authority of 
MeiTrs. Butini and Tingry, of Geneva;* and the 
procefs, which he has given, from the former 
of thefe Gentlemen, is very ill adapted to free 
the Magnefia, from the whole of the vitriolated 
tartar, formed in the mixture. Now, fuppofino- 
aerial acid to be a compound of Air and Phlot 
gifton, the laft portions being feparated with 
difficulty from the Magnefia, a decompofuicm 
of the Gas may take place, and a new combina- 
tion enfue. The Phlogifton, quitting its aerial 
bufis, may unite with the Earth and Vitriolic 
Acid, and, by this union, a Pyrophorus be 
formed; and, probably, from this caufe, the 
appearances, defcribed by thefe Chemifts/ may 
have proceeded. 

• Fourcroy's Lpftures, vol. \ p. ^ h an d 2gz , 
END OF VOL. FIRST. 



• • ¦ 

'••• ' -is 



IN D E X 

" TO THE 

FIRST VOLUME, 

A. 

jCADE MV S, ancient, defcribed - . *f! 

Acids, their ufe in bleaching linen, by Dr. Eason 240 

Addison, Mr. quoted - ,." 

A i kin, Dr. fenior, his character -^ 

junior, on attempts to winter in high northern 

latitudes - . . '.'"". 8 

Akekside, Dr. his beautiful defcription of diftreiilng 



fcenes accompanied with pleafure 
Amufements, literary ones recommended „ . ,- 

Animal fubftances regenerated - „ , 2 - , ,g 



bones, 329; nerves, 333; arteries, 334; crabs' 
and worms, ,335 
Ancients, knew that water would cooj more eafily, which 

had been heated - c 

- 202 

tnat th e evaporation of fluids produces 

cold - ,' 

205 

that air is diflblved in water, by means 



of heat and agitation - ss 

why the lower air is more heated than the 



high 



" - 26S 

— ¦ why hail-ftones fuddenly concrete - 2 68 

" that air is (eparaced from water by freezing 269 

Ancients, knew that water will rife to its level i n pi pes 269 

compared with moderns as to the imitative arts 405 

Arthur's feat, pebbles found there * 

Arts, a general acquaintance with them neceflary to 
excellence 

77 
—— plan for extending them . g 

B. 



N 



b 

B. 



X. 



Barnes, Dr. on poetry - - 

. on the affinity fubfifling between the arts 



Page 
54- 
7 2 
72 
38 



Barrow, Dr. his obfcrvaiion on general fcholars 
Bafalles - 

Baume, quoted - 32, 33, 449, 462 

Beauty in the imitative arts, defined, and accounted for 121 
Bell, Dr. on the generation of cold 1 

Bifmtttb, forms ftriae on its furface - . 40 

Black lock, Dr. an account of him - - 166 

BUndneJs, observations on by Mr. Bew - - 159 

Brindley, what advantage he might have received 

from education - - - - 8j 

Brown, Mr. of Virginia, his method of making fakpetre 203 
m ¦ Mr. author of the EfTay on the Charatteriftics, 
quoted - 230 

C 
Carew, his account of aged perfons in Cornwall - 359 
Cavallo, his account of the electricity of the atmo- 

fphere - - 398 

Cau/e-way Giants, defcribed - - 38 

Charades, riddles,,&c. why agreeable - 113 

Chemijiry recommended to the commercial ftudent 24 

.____— adopted the fymbols of aflronomy 254 

Cheselden, Mr. couched a young man born blind, with 

fuccefs - - - - 178 

Cbiaro-fcuro, a modern invention - - 410 

Cbry ft alligation, by Dr. Eason - - 29 

Cicero, his account of the effeft of Carbo's Oratory 69 

Colours, inftances of perfons who cannot accurately dif- 

tinguiili them - - - 182 

Confiia of feelings, the caufe of pleafure - 157 

Contraft, in poetry, painting and mufic, agreeable 1 19 

Copper, why it has the fymbol of Venus - 256 

Corn, a bounty upon it improper - - 413 

Ctu; 



I N D E X. 

Page 
Coiv, adapted to the ufe of man - - 442 

<* ' has four ftomachs, long inteftines, &c. - 443 

— — has four teats, gives her milk to the hand, &c. 444 

Curiof,ty, one caufe of pleafure in viewing fcenes of 

diflrefs - - - - |r~ 

Cujloms, neceffary in the prefent ftate of Europe a 11 

Cylinder-wire, its application to corn, bark, fand, &c. 7% 

D. 

Diver/ions, of hunting, (hooting, &c. reconcileable with 
humanity - _ - 

. the human mind naturally inclined to them 34? 

. they conduce to health and pleafure - , 4 6 

do not diminifh the pleafure of the animals 349 

¦ often purfued by perfons the moil humane and 

benevolent - , r . 

Dreamt, of a blind man refpecting vifible objects 1S1 

Dyers, but few of them chemijls - 2 j 

E. 

Earth, magnejian, its origin . - .r- 

• ¦ calcareous, not convertible into filiceous ,,q 

... , ¦ divifion of, into five genera - _ ,- 

Eason, Dr. on chryftallization 2Q 

EaJI, the beautiful patterns from thence, accounted for 27- 

its poetry fine, becaufe defcribing natural fcenes 276 

EUdriciiy, its influence in evaporation - , g g 

¦ ¦ in fufpending vapour 400 

Engraving, a modern invention 4 , 2 

Epic poem, demands unity of action . l2 Q 

Evaporation, from a heated human body - . 

in vacuo - . , 9 g 

Execution of malefaclors, why attended by fo many perfons 148 

Exercife, its effect in preventing the fcurvy - J0 6 

. of the mind, pleafant - - 110 

f ¦ ¦ a caufe of the pleafure felt in contemplating 

fcenes of diflrefs - t rS 

F. 



D 

F. 



X. 



Pag* 



ic*« 

:¦« 



Fijb — oil and fat, ufed by the Samoides, Efquimaux, 

&c. as food - 

Fixed air, machine for impregnating water, &c. with it 

Flint, probably compounded of water, and an acid 3 5 

Flj-fiuttle, not yet ufed in the Norwich manufacture 84 

fogs, caufes of them - 404. 

Fordyce, Dr. experiments on cold - 1 

Fulbam, account of falt-petre works formed there 201 

Future Jiate, differently reprefented by different people 286 



Gardening, its ftyle and tafte among the ancients 297 

Gardens, hanging ones, of Babylon, defcribed - 301 

. of Lucullus, defcribed - - 308 

— — of Pliny, his Laurentine Villa, defcribed 312 

modern, defcribed and recommended - 32a 

Gentleman, the importance to him of a tafte for literature 9, 10 
Glauber, his attempts to make falt-petre - 198 

Greenland, account of feven Dutch failors who wintered 

there 1633 
Gyp/tan, five forts of - - - 



93 

3 2 



H. 



Halt., Rev. Mr. on the influence of tafte on morals 223 

Haygarth, Dr. his machine for impregnating water, 

&c. with fixed air - - - 52 

Heat, latent, not unknown to the ancients - 267 

Heathen religion, favourable to fculpture - 407 

Henry, Mr. on the advantages of literature and philofo- 

phy, and their confiftency with commercial purfuits 7 

¦ ¦ on the preservation of fea water by quicklime 4 1 

-¦ on the natural and chemical hiftory of mag- 

nefian earth - 4.48 

Hiflory, particularly Englifh, ufeful to a tradefman t6 

• requires a good imagination, in order to be read 

with pleafure - - - 391 

Horace 



I* N D E X. 

Page 
Horace, his defcription of a true poet - 59 

Hudfons Bay, wintered in by Monck, and James 90, 92 

J. 

Jam^s, captain, winters in Hudfon's Bay - g\ 

Ice, modern way of making it in the Eaft Indies 266 

Imagery, how far it conftitutes the eflence of poetry 56 

Imagination, necefTary to correct judgment - 378 

¦ defined ... g8z 

....... ¦ amazingly ftrong in children - 393 

Indians, American, their mufic and poetry plaintive 285 

Johnson, Dr. remarks on his criticifms upon Milton 66, 71 

Iron, why it has thefymbol of Mars «- 257 

IJJands, more healthy than continents - 366 

Italy, peculiarly favourable to longevity - 358 

Jupiter, his fymbol accounted for - . 247 

. why applied to exprefs tin - » 258 

K. 
Keeping, in painting, little understood by the ancients 411 
K 1 r s h a w, Mr. on the comparative merit of the ancients 

and moderns - 405 

Kirwan, Mr. quoted - - 454,470 

Knowledge, general, neceflary to particular - 73 

. mathematical, its connection with Imagina- 
tion - 387 

L. 

Laniaff, bimop of, quoted - 457 

laodjcape painting, ancient, very bad - 411 

Language, originally poetical - - 58 

Laocoon, flatue of, defcribed - - 123 

Laplanders, account of their diet by Linn jEUS - 99 

Linen, bleached by acids ... 240 

¦ manufactures, the duties they pay when imported 437 

Linwjeus, his accountof the diet of the Laplanders 99 

Limature and philofophy, foften the rigours of war 8 

Literature 



I 1ST D E & 

Page 
literature and philofophy, multiply the fources of pleafure 9 

_ 1 > are ufeful to the gentleman 10 

_ ._ » to the merchant 1 1 

_ . ... fumifh agreeable amufement 14 



London, bills of mortality, quoted from 1728 to 1758 362 

Longevity, obfervations on by Dr. Fothergill 355 

. -tables of - - 357, 35S, 360 

— depends on air, &c. 365 ; foods, Sec. 367 ; mo- 
rion and reft, 369; fecretions, &c. 369; affections 
of mind, 369 

M. 

Machine, for impregnating water, &c. with fixed air 52 

Machines, generally invented by perfons not educated to 

mechanic employments 82 

Magellan, Mr. his letter to Mr. Henry on the infufi- 

bility of magnefia - 466 

Magneftan earth, its natural and chemical hiflory 448 

., various combinations in which it is 

found - 452 

- ¦ its origin - - - 455 

. ¦¦ infufibility ascertained - 46$ 

folubility in acids when calcined proved 469 
not phofphoric - - 473 



Manners, rude and ferocious, in mountainous and uncul- 
tivated countries - - - 2S1 
Manufaclures, cotton in particular, depend upon machines 80 
Mars, his fymbol explained ... 255 
Medici, the family of, their character by lord Orreky 238 
Memory, peculiarly ftrong in blind perfons - 175 
Merchant, importance of tafte for literature in him 1 1 
Metcalf, John, though blind, a celebrated furveyor 

and projeclor of highways - - 172 

Milton defended 71 

. fuperior to Homer and Virgil in unity of aclion 130 

Mind, human, improperly faid to confift of feveral diftinft 

powers - - 377 

Miners, 



INDEX. 

Page 

Miners, in general hardy and ferocious - 283 

Modulation, regular, effential to poetry - 60 

. ¦ . different in different languages - 68 

Monck, captain, winters in Hudfon'sBay - 90 

Moyes, Henry, Dr. account of him - 168 

Muriatic acid, recommended for bleaching linens 24.2 

N. 

Newton, Sir Isaac, poffefled a vigorous fancy 389 

O. 
Oratory, capable of imagery and elevation, as much as 

poetry ... _ 61 

Ofiris, the fupreme deity of the Egyptians, his fymbol 246 

P. 
Pallas, Mons. his account of iflands between Kam- 

fkatka and America - 98 

Parry, the blind mufician, account of him - 167 

PaJJions, their influence and ufe in directing the 

judgment - - 381 

Pebbles, produced by irregular chryftallization • 37 

Percivai, Dr. his tribute to the memory of 

Charles de Polier, Efq. - - 287 

Phyfiaan, what neceflary to conftitute a fkilful one 386 

Plan, for extending arts and manufactures at 

Manchefter - %* 
Phafure, of contemplating fcenes of diftrefs accounted 

for ... I4+ 

Polier, Mr. de, on the pleafure of mental exercife no 

' tribute to his memory - . 287 

Polite Arts, tafte in, neceflary for a manufacturer 28 

Pot-ajh, ufe of in making falt-petre - . 217 

Quicklime, applied to the prefervation of fea water - 41 

¦ quantity requifite - - 40 

• its action accounted for - . aq 

Vol. I. I i R; 



INDEX. 

R. 

Page 

Regljlers, (Economical, recommended _ j, 4 

¦ ' to know the ftate of population 137 

~ ¦ to difcover thieves, &c. - 138 

¦ ' to know the quantity of corn 

annually produced - 1 ,., 

Reid, Dr. quoted ... jfo 

Rein Jeer, their blood drank warm, how it afts as a pre- 

fervative from the fcurvy - . 104 

Religion, how far influenced by the fcenery of a country 279 
Rembrandt, charadbr of his paintings - 410 

Repofitory, propofed for chemical and mechanical arts 85 

Reynolds, Sir Joshua, quoted - - 409 

Rhyme, why agreeable - - - \\r 

Roi, Mr. de, his theory of evaporation - 396 

s. 

Saturn, his fymbol explained - - - 252 

¦ why ufed to reprefent lead - - 257 
Saltpetre, treatifeonby Mr. Massey - 184 
1 caufes of the ill fuccefs of trials for making 

it in England - - 185, &c. 

¦ what principles enter into its compofition 188 
— — — — how the peculiar acid, neceflary to form it, 



is generated - - - 191, &c. 

the influence of putrefaction in forming it 133 

— — caufes of its abundance in India - 19c 

— — the old and approved method of obtaining it 205 

makers of, in Paris, incorporated - 208 

— — account of the author's experiments 209 

— method of making it in Paris - 211 

tranflation, on the ufe of pot-afh in making it 217 

procured, ready formed, upon the earth, in 



Warm climates - 461 

Sah-fea, its natural hiftory as connected with that of 
magrieiian earth - 456 

bit- 



INDEX, 

Page 
Salt-fea, or bay, better than that made from rocfcs or 

fprings - 43 

Samoides, drink the warm blood of rein deer - gg 

Saunderson, Dr. account of him - 163 

Scenery, of a country, its influence upon the inhabitants 271 
Scurvy, occafioned by fait meats, and fpirituous liquors, 

in cold climates - IO q 

Sculpture, promoted by the heathen religion r 407 

Sea-ivater, its compofition - a Z 

Smith, Dr. on the wealth of nations, quoted - 82 

Spar, Derbyshire, how compounded - 33 

Speftator, No. 41 1, quoted _ _ „ 

Spitsbergen, account of feven Dutch failors who win- 
tered there 1638 - 03 

*¦ ¦ ¦ eight Englilhmen ditto 54 

• Eaft, four Ruffians winter there 96 

Spirituous liquors, unfavourable to the fcurvy - 104 

Stanley, Mr. the blind mufician, account of him 167 

S:eam, a powerful principle, lately applied to different ufes 79 
Ster ne, quoted - in 

S;oves, precious, originally in fulion - 34 

• contain three principles o(j 

Sully's Memoirs, extract from, relating to an intended 

cabinet - - - _ 87 

Sun, the origin of its agronomic fymbol - 246 

Symbols, ufed firft by aftronomers, and afterwards by 

chcmirts - 24c 

Sympathy, the fource of many noble pleafures - 1^4 

T. 

lafle, its influence upon the ftrong poetic character 6c 

its analogy to the moral feelings, alTerted 134 

1 its influence not favourable to morals - 223 

diftinguifhed from the moral fenfe - 226 

may fliew the beanty of virtue, without giving the 

power ... 228 



%ti INDEX. 

Pag<J 

Tajte, its connexion with genius - 233 

. — — with religion - 233 

— — inflances.in which it produces misfortune or im- 
morality - - - 234 
— — effefts of it at Athens - - 236 
Tempejl at fea, agreeable to behold from the fnore 149 
Towns, large, unfriendly to longevity - 362 
Turcot, Monf. his letter to Mr. Wimpey - 135 
¦ his remarks on preventing the exporta- 
tion of corn - - - 429 

U. 

Undemanding, influenced by the imagination and paflions 381 
Unity, of action in painting and poetry, why agreeable 126 



Vapour, eight hundred times lighter than air - 397 

.. quicker from water eleftrified - 398 

Venus, the fame with Ifis ; her fy mbol accounted for 250 

Verfe, regular, its origin accounted for - 64 

Volt a, Mr. his remarks on eledlricity - 399 

W. 

War, its horrors foftened by literature - 8 
Whole's fritters, eaten by perfons wintering at Spitzbergen 95 

Wheat, itsprice in 1687 ¦ - - - 4 18 

____— often fown injudicioufly, and why - 426 

Whitehurst, Mr. his inquiry into, &c. quoted 367 

Wimpey, Mr. againft the bounty on corn - 413 

Wind/or tables, quoted - - - 420 

Woollen manufadure, the numbers employed in it 435 

Y. 

Youths, two, nftored from confumptions by human 

milk - - 44 6 




