¦w^..-w 



TRANSACTIONS 



OF THE 



LINNEAN SOCIETY. 



vJ 






TRANSACTIONS 



OF THE 



LINNEAN SOCIETY. 



VOLUME I. 



GAKDSH. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED B r J. D A r I S. 

SOLD BY BENJAMIN WHITE AND SON, FLEET-STREET. 



( V ) 



O N T E N T S. 



I. TNTRODUCTORr Bifcourfe on the Rife and Progrefs of 
J- Natural Hi/iory, By James Edward Smith, M, D, K R. S, 
Prefident of the Linnean Society < ¦ Page I 

'II. Obfer'oations on feme extraneous tojjih of S'witzerland, By 
Mr. Tingry, Foreign Member of the Linnean Society, Demon- 
Jirator of Chemijiry and Natural Hijlory at Geneva, &c, p, 57 

III. Obfervatlom on the Phalt^ena Bombyx Lubricipeda of Linnausy 
and fome other Moths allied to it. By Thomas Marlliam, Efq. 
Secretary to the Linnean Society p. 67 

IV". Defer iptions of four Species of Cypripedium, By Richard 
Anthony SaUlbury, Efq, F, R, S. Fellow of the Linnean 
Society » _— ¦ p. 76 

V. Defcriptions of ten Species of Lichen, colledied in the South of 
Europe, By James Edward Smith, M. Z). F. R, S. Prefdent 
of the Linnean Society * ¦ ¦ p. 81 

"- a VhSome 



VI 



CONTENTS. 



VI. Some Obfervaiions on the Natural Hiflory of the Curculio 
Lapaihi and Silpha grifea. By Mr. William Curtis, Fellow 

of the Linnean Society > p. 86 

VII. Defcrtption of the Stylephorus chordatus, a new fifh. By 
George Shaw, M. D. F. R. S, Fellow of the Linnean 
Society - -¦ — .-^v p. 90 

VIII. T>efcription of the Hirudo viridis, a new Fngli/h Leech, 

By the fame __ p. g^ 

IX. ^he Botanical Hifidfy of fhe Oandfa alha. By Olof Swartz, 
M. D. Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Stockholniy 
Foreign Member of the Linnean Society p. 96 

X. Defer iption of the Cancer ft agnalis of Linn<^us, By George 
Shaw, M, D. F, R. S. Fellow 6f the Linnean Society — p. 103 

XI. On the Pejiuca fpadicSa and Anthoxanthum panlculatum of 
Linnets, By James Edward Smith, M, D. F. R. S, Prefident 

cf the Linnean Society ¦ ¦ " p. m 

XII. On the Migration of certain Birds, and on other Matters 
relating to the feathered 'Tribes. .By William Markwick, Efq. 

< AJfcciciie of the Linnean Society p, ug 

XIII. The Hifory and Defcription of a new Species of Fucus. By 
Thomas Jenkinibn Woodward, Ffq, Fellow of the Linnean 

, '^Society » ¦ — ' — p. j^i 

8 XIV. Account 



CONTENTS. , yii 

XIV. .Account of a /ingtilat Conformation in the ff'ings of fome 
, Species of Mcdbs. Bj/ Mr. Efprit Giorna, of Turin y Foreign 

Member of the Li?inean Society ¦ p. i^c 

XV. Ohfcrvaiions on the Language of Botany. By the Rev, 
-^Thomas Martyn, B, D. K R, S. Prof ef or of Botany in the 

Univerfty of Cambridge^ Fellow of the Linnean Society ; in a Letter 
addreffed to the Prefident ¦ ¦ p. 1^7 

XVI. Obfervations on the Genus of Begonia. By Jonas Dryander, 
M. A. Libr. R. S, and Alember of the Royal Academy of Sciences 

of Stockholm y Fellow of the Linnean Society — V' ^S^ 

i 

XVII. On the Genus of Symplocos, comprehending Hopea and 
Aljionia (Linn.), and Ciponima (Aubh), By Mr. Charles 
Loms L'lleiltier, of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, Foreign 
Member of the Linnean Society " p. ija 

XVIII. On the Genus of Calligonum, comprehending Pterococcus 
(Pallaf) and Pallafa (Linn.). By the fame — P* 177 

XIX. Obfervations on Polypodium Oreopteris, accompanied with a 
Specimen from Scotland. By Mr. James Dickfon, Fellow of 

the Li7inean Society > • p. 181 

XX. Account of a fpinning Limax, or Slug. By Mr. Thomas Hoy, 

of Gordon Cafle, AJfociate of the Linnean Society — P« 183 

XXI. Defcriptions of three new Animals found in the Pacific Ocean, 
By Mr, Archibald Menzies, Fellow of the Linnean Society 

p. 187 

a 2 XXII. Remarks 



viii CONTENTS. 

XXII. Remarh on the Genus Veronica. By James Edward Smith, 

M, D. F, R, S» Prejident of the Llnnean Society — p. 1 89 

XXIII. Defcnptions of two new Species of PhaUna, By Mr, 
Louis Bofc, of Paris, Foreign Member of the Linnean Society 

p. 196 

XXIV. The Botanicgl Hiftory of the Genus Diilenia, with an 
Addition of fever al nondefcript Species. By Charles Peter 
Thunberg, Knight of the Order of Wafa^ Profejfor of Botany 
and Medicine in the Univerfiy of Upfal^ Foreign Member of the 
Linnean Society ¦ p. 198 

XXV. The Botanical Hiftory of Trifolium alpeftre, medium^ and 
pratenfe. By Adam Afzelius, M, A. Demonftrator of Botany in 
the Univerfiy of Upfal, Foreign Member of the Linnean Society 

p. 202 

XXVI. An Account of feveral Plants prefenfed to the Society^ 
at different Times, by Mr, John Fairbairn and Mr, Thomas 
Hoy, Fellows of the Linnean Society * By the Prefdent p. 249 

XXVII. Extradls from the Minute Book of the Society p. 255 



LIN- 



( i'' ) 



LINNEAN SOCIETY. 

This Mark f is prefixed to the Names of fuch Members as are deceafcd. 



HONORARY MEMBERS. 

Sir JOSEPH BANKS, Bart. Prefident of the Royal Society,. 

HENRY, Earl of GAINSBOROUGH. 

The Marechal de NOAILLES.. 



F E L L O W s. 

J;AMEs Edward Smith, M. D. President, F. R. S. Acad. Reg, Sc, 
I'aurin. Delphin, necmn Soc, Htft. Nat, Paris. Sodus. UliJJip, Jgron. Paris. 
Botanoph. Andegav. Correjp,. 

Mr. George Adams, Fleet-Street. 

Robert Barclay, Efq. Clapham. 

Mr. John Beckwith, Spitalfields.. 

James Crowe, Efq. Norwich. 

Sir Thomas Gery Cullum, Bart. F. R. S. Bury. 

Mr. William Curtis, St. George's Crefcent. 

Edmund Davall, Efq. Orbe, in Switzerland. 

The Rev. Hugh Davies, Re(5tor of Abcr, North Wales. 

Mu 



¦ ( X ) 

Mr. James Dickfon^ Covent- Garden. 

Jonas Dryander, M. A. Librarian, Lilr. to the Roy. Soc. Acad. Re<r, Sc, 

Stockfjclm. ei Soc, I^JT.' KdK Tdi-ls. Soc. Dean-StreeF." "'"""""""^"^'"''^ "'""- 
Samuel Ewer, Efq. Crooins Hill, Greenwich. 

Mr. John Fairbairn, Chelfea Garden. -^fj|||,| _¦ 

John Ford, M. D. Bond Street. 

Samuel Galtpn, Juni Efq. F. ]^, 3vBirmiihgfiarq^ --j 4 ^^ ¦•* ? 
The Rev. Samuel Goodenough, LL. D. Treasurer, F. R. sT Ealing. 
William Hanbury, Efq. Kilmarflij NorthamptOBdiire, . 
Mr. Thomas Hoy, Sion Houfe. 
Mr. William Hudfon, F. R. S. Jermyn- Street. 
Aylmer Bourke Lambert, Efq. F. R. S. Salifbury. 
Mr. John Latham, F. R. S. Dartford. ., ^^ . , , 
John Latham, M. D. Eflex-Street. ~ "^^ ^''' ^^ ^ 
George V^ifcount Lewisham, F. R. S. Hayes. I*^IHP01^ &^'-- 

t The Rev. John Ljg,htfoctj M. A. F. R. S. L -vL;::j-.\ ^^ , . 
The Rev. John Lyon, Dover. 
Thomas Marsham, Efq. Secretary, Upper Berkley- Street, Portman 

Square. 
The Rev. Thomas Martyn, B. D. F. R. S. Prof. Bot. Cambridge, Park 

Profped, Weftmintler. 
Mr. Aichibald Menzies. 

Richard Molefworth, Efq. F. R. S. Dorfet-Court. -> 

The Rev. Edmund Poulter, Portman- Square. 
Richard Powel, B. A. Merton College, Oxford. 
Richard Pulteney, M. D. F. R. S. Blandford, Dorfet. 

The Rev. Richard Relhan, M. A. F. R. S. Cambridge. ^ ,.,1,, ' - . - 
John Rotheram, M. D. 

Richard Anthony Salifbury, Efq. F. R. S. Chapel Allerton, near Leeds. 
George Shaw, M. D. F. R. S. Britilh Mufeum. 
John Sibthorp. M. D. F. R. S. Prof. Bot. Oxford^ Sec. Reg. Monjp. et Getting. 

Correjp. Soc. Hift. Nat. Paris. Soc. Oxford. q ^--. - |.,^„. 

John Sims, M. D. Paternofter- Row. 

The 



( xi ) 

The Rev. Harvey Spragg, Welbcck-Street. CJ 

Sir George Leonard Staunton, Bart. F. R. S. Berners- Street. ¦ 

Robert Stone, Efq. Bungay. 

Mr. John Timothy Swainlon, Dover-Place. 

Mr. Robert Tcefdale, Ranelagh. 

WilUam Watfon, Efq. F. R. S. Bedford Square. 

Jofeph Windham, Efq. F. R. S. Portland- Place. 

The Rev. William Wood, Leeds. 

Thomas Jenkinfon Woodward, Efq. Bungay. 

William Woodville, M. D. Bartholomew- Lane. 

William Younge, M. D. Sheffield. 

Mr. John Zier,.Ranelagh-Street, Pimlico. ^ i 

FOREIGN MEMBERS. 

D. Adam Afzelius, ^. M. Botan, Demonftr. U;^4. 

D. Carolus Allioni, M. D. Soc. P^eg. Lend. Sac. Bot, Prof, Emer, C^ Acad. R^ 

Scienf. "Taurin. Sec. ' , 

D. Petrus Arduino, Oecon, Prof. Patav. 
D. Antonius Bannal, Hort. Reg. Monfp. Cujlos. 
D. Ludovicus Bellardi, M. D. Coll. Med. Taurin. Soc. 
D. J. P. Berthout Van Berchem, Soc. PhyJ. Laufann. Soc. 
D. Jacobus Julianus La Billardiere, Af. Z). Parifiis. "' 

D. Ludovicus Bofc, Parifiis. 
D, P. M. Auguflus Brouffonet, M. D. Sec. Reg, Lend. Ac. Reg. Sc, Paris. (^ 

Mcn/p. Socius, Soc. Reg. Oecon. Par. a Secretis^ ... 
D. Csefar Caqeferi, M. D. Genuse. ** T 1" . 

D. Antonius Jofephu's Cavanillj^s, Socief, Reg. Sc. Up/al, Soc. Madriti. 
D. Philippus Cavolini, Acad. Reg. Sc. Neap. Soc. 

D. Jacobus Gels, Soc.HiJi. Nat. Paris. Praf. ^ -- 

D. Jofephus Correa de Serra, J. U. D. Acad. Reg. Sc. Ulyjf. a Secretis. * 
D. Rodorigus de Soufa Coutinho, Legatus Regm. Lufit. ad Reg. Sardin** 
D. Dominicus Cyrilli, Prof. Therap. in Lyceo Neap,"'- -'^ -'''^ ,.¦ - Ji i .CI 
D. Johannes Pet. M. Dana, Hif. Nat. Prof, Of Ac. R, Sc. Taurin. Soc. 

D. Renatus 



( ^ii ) 

t>. Rcnatus Louichc Desfontaines, M. D. Bot. Prof, Ac. Reg, Sc. Paris, Soc, 

Parifiis. 
D. Jacobus Anfelmus Dorthe?, M. D. Soc. Reg. Sc, Monfp, Soc. 
D. Hippolitus Durazzo, Patricius Cenoenfis. 
D. Felix Fontana, DireSlcr Muf. PhyJ. Reg. Florent. 
D. Ludovicus Gerard, M. D. Cottignac, Gallo- Provincial. 
D. Efprit Giorna, Taurine. 

D. Antonius Gouan, M. D. Med. Prof. Soc. Reg. Sc, Monfp, See. 
D. Johannes Theoph. Grofchke, M, D. Hifi. Nat. Prof. Mitav. 
D. Carolus Ludovicus L*H€ritier, Jc, Reg. Sc. Paris. Soc. 
D. Johannes Herman, M. D. Med. Chem. & Mat. Med. Prof. Argentor. 
D, Antonius Ludovicus de Juffieu, Acad. Reg. Sc. Parij. Soc, ^/; 

D. Jofephus Francifcus a Jacquin. 
D. Nicolaus Jofephus a Jacquin, Soc, Reg, Lend. Soc. Bet. et Chem, Prof. 

yindoh. 
D. Wernerus de Lachenal, Prof. Bot. Bajil. 

D. Lambert us Lucas Van Meurs, Anat. Pr^gleSl. Amjlelod. -iiy**^ - 

D. Aubin Ludov. Millin, Sec, Hijl. Nat. Paris, a Secretis. 
D. Gulielmus Antonius Olivier, M, D. Acad. Reg. Sc, Majfil. Socius, Soc. 

Agron. Parif. Correfp. Parifiis. 
D. Nicolaus Pacific©, Acad. Reg, Sc. Neap. Soc. 
D. Johannes Baptilla Pratolongo fil. M, D. Genuse. 
D. De Reynier, Soc. Phyf. Laufann. Soc, 

D. David Van Royen, Soc. Reg^ Lond. Soc, Bot. Prof. Etnerit, Lugd. Bat, 
D. Ant. Scarpa, Soc. Reg. Lond. Soc. Anat. Prof. Ticin, 
D. J. G. Schlanbufch, Regi Dania a Cubiculis. 

D. ChriRJanus Frid. Schumacher, Acad. Reg. Cbirurg, Hafn. AdjunSfm, 
\ D. Johannes Antonius Scopoli, Chem. & Bot. Prof. Ticin. 
D. Andreas Sparrman, M. D. Acad. Reg. Sc. Stockholm, Soc, 
D. Olaus Swartz, M. D, Acad. Reg. Sc. Stockholm, Soc. 
D. Nicolaus Sam. Swederus, RegiSuec.a Sacris, 
D. Thibaud, M. D. Monfpelii. 
D. Thouin, Acad. Reg. Sc. Parif. Soc, 

D. Carolus 



( xiii ) 

D. Carolus Petrus Thunberg, M. D. Equ. Ord. IVafiaci, Soc, Reg. Lond. Soc. 

Med. ^ Bot. Prof. Ugal. 
D. Tingry, Chem. Prakrr. Genev, 
D. Odavian. TargioniTozzetti, M. D. Florentine. 
D. Ericus Viborg, Ariis Veterin. Profejfor Hafn, 
D. Villars, M. D. Gratianopoli. 
D. Philippus Werner, Chirurg. Algirise. 
D. Willemet, Bot. Prof. Nanc. 
D. Jacob. Samuel Wyttenbach, S. 'T. P. Berna;. 
D. Eberh. Aug. Guil. Zimmermann, Pbyf. Prof. Brunfvic, 

ASSOCIATES. 

Mr, William Boys, F. A. S. Sandwich. 

Francis Buchannan, M. D. Eall-lndies. 

William Coyte, M. D. Ipfwich. 

^ Mr. Thomas Spence Duche. 

Edward Whitaker Gray, M. D. F. R. S. Britilh Mufeum. 

John Heylham, M. D. Carlille. 

Thomas Hope, M, D. Profejfor of Medicine ^ Glafgow. 

Mr. James Hoy, Gordon Caftle, Scotland. 

Mr. George Humphrey, Black friars Road. ^. 

Mr. Edward Hunter, Caen-Wood. 

The Rev. William Kirby, Barham. 

Mr. Thomas Lamb, Reading. 

The Rev. Peter Lathbury, Orford. 

William Markwick, Efq. Catsfield, near Battle. 

Mr. Robert Menzies, Edinburgh. 

Mr. John Pitchford, Norwich. 

Mr. Edward Robfon, Darlington. 

Mr. Charles Stewart, Secretary to the Nat. Hift, Societyy Edinburgh, 

Mr. William Sole, Bath. 

b Mr. 



( xiv ) 

Mr. James Sowerby, Mead-Place, St, George's Fields. 
Jonathan Stokes, M. D. Kidderminfter. 
The Rev. Ciiarles Sutron, B. D. Norwich, 
Walter Wade, M. D. Dublin. 
Mr. Lilly Wigg, Great-Yarmouth. 



'^tfriiiriiiim'Biifriiiii- 




INTRO- 



INTRODUCTORY DISCOURSE 



ON THE 



RISE AND PROGRESS 



O F 



NATURAL HISTORY. 



DELIVERED BY THE PRESlDENTy APRIL 8, 1 788, 



THE Study of Nature, that is an attention to the ground on 
which we tread, the vegetables which clothe and adorn it, 
and the boundlefs variety of living creatures prefenting themfelves 
to our notice on every fide, mufl have been one of the firft occu- 
pations of man in a ftate of nature. In no country hitherto dif- 
covered, however barbarous and unenlightened, is the human race 
found fo negligent and helplefs as not to have inveftigated the 
natural bodies around them, fo far at lead as from thence to fupply 

B their 



2 Dr. SmithV Introdudiory Dtfcourfe, 

their neceflary wants, and even to obtain conveniences and luxuries. 
In the more hofpitable climes in which probably mankind were 
firfl eftabliihed, this taflv was the more eafy. The calls of nature 
would there be readily fatisfied ; and while the fenfes were gratified 
with all they were capable of enjoying, the mind, ever prone to 
curiofity, would be continually exercifed and delighted in invefti- 
gating the creation around it. Then, as the human race multi- 
plied, would the fpirit of competition arife for the difcovery of 
hitherto untafted luxuries or unknown conveniences ; and he who 
firft climbed the lofty palm-tree, and while its leafy honours were 
waving above his head, fcattered the golden fliower of plenty 
upon his admiring companions, would deferve and enjoy more real 
glory, than any deftroyer of his fellow creatures ever enjoyed, after 
thofe very boughs became proflituted to proclaim the triumph of 
defolation and war. 

By degrees mankind became fo numerous and fo adventurous as 
not only to occupy all that part of the world in which they were 
firft fettled, but alfo to migrate into far diftant countries, where 
ruder jfkies and lefs fruitful plains taught them new wants, and 
put their ingenuity to greater trials. In fliort, by means and acci- 
dents which mofl likely will long remain a problem for philofo- 
phers, the human race became in procefs of time difperfed over 
almoft every part of the globe where art and labour could find 
them prote6lion and fubfiftence. Their various acquirements, in 
the courfe of their long, laborious progrefs, muft have been all 
founded on the knowledge and obfervation of nature ; and with 
fo much accuracy have they ftudied this fubjed, fo interefting to 
them all, that even in the moft advanced ftate of fociety, as well as 
in the loweft, mankind are perfedly agreed upon the ufes of moft 
of the neceffaries with which nature furnifhes them ; they have 
all alike learned precifely to what purpofe each is fit, and all fupply 

the 



Dr. Smith'j IntrcJti^ory Difcourfe, 3 

the ordinaiy wants of life, all remove its ordinary inconveniences, 
much in the fame way. 

If on the prefent occafion my principal obje^l: were to amufe the 
fancy, I Ihould dwell long on this early period of the hiftory of the 
human race. The iirft probable wants and inventions of man- 
kind ; their progrefs from a ftate of nature, peace and innocence, 
to one more turbulent and a(5livc, but lefs natural and happy; the 
fmiple origin of each art and fcience, and efpecially the fourcc 
of all human knowledge, in the obfervation of nature, with the 
different degrees of cultivation which each fcience may be fuppofed 
to have received according to the various circumftances in which 
mankind have been — all thefe things might form a very amufing 
fubje6t for fpeculation : but as fuch difquifitions mufl be chiefly 
guided by the imagination, and after all could be only ccnfidered 
in the light of a romance, I mud not at prcfcnt enter upon them. 
My review of thofe much later periods, although ftill far remote 
from us, in which the progrefs of fcience begins to be marked, 
mufl be even more flight than the traces of its footfteps in the page 
of hiftory ; and we fhall eafily confole ourfelves for out ignorance 
of what former ages have thought and known, when we find how 
little real advantage is to be derived from the knowledge of thofc 
much nearer to us. 

In a very early ftate of fociety the fum of human knowledge 
would become too much for every individual to acquire ; of courfe 
fome muft neceffarily purfue particular arts or enquiries in pre- 
ference to the reft; and this difference is obfervable not only 
among individuals, but alfo between different nations and bodies of 
men. In infant ftates warlike accomplifhments more than any 
others engage the generality of the citizens, and, becaufe moft evi- 
dently neceflary to the fafety of the whole, are held in the higheft 
efteem. But when external danger is kept at a diftance, the inter- 

B 2 nai 



4 T)r. Smith'j" Introductory Dlfcourfe. 

nal regulations of the flate, and the foftcr arts of peace, become 
more interefting to thofe who have talents for cultivating thera. 
A part of the community being fufficient to fupply the whole with 
the neceflaries of life, the occupations of the reft becoming voluntary, 
are as various as the virtues and vices, tafles, genius and abili- 
ties of mankind ; and the more a people are refined and enlight- 
ened, the more various and the more diftindly marked are the pur- 
fuits of individuals. 

The early hiftory of fcience informs us rather of peculiar acquire^ 
ments by which certain nations diftinguiihed themfelves from the 
reft, than of the general ftock of knowledge then in the world. 
Thus we are told of the fkill of the Egyptians in aftronomy, to 
which they were peculiarly led by their manner of repofmg on open 
terraces under a cloudlefs fky. But we are not to conclude that 
this fcience had never been cultivated by any people before, nor 
that the Egyptians, and all the reft of the world, had lived totally 
void of curiofity, and blind to every thing around them, till their 
attention was excited by the trivial circumftance above mentioned. 
We learn from the Old Teftament, which if it were merely an 
human work would be the mofi: venerable monument in the world, 
that Natural Hiftory was very early one of the fciences in the highefk 
cflimation. Without examining what was the prccife degree of 
Solomon's fkill in this fcience, the manner in which his botanical 
knowledge is mentioned in the Bible, proves that to have been in 
thofe days the moft efteemed perhaps of all learning whatever. 
Yet where are the records of its progrefs ? How totally is the 
knowledge of thofe ages and of numberlefs others loft to us I 

As botany and aftronomy have been among the earlieft purfuits of 
mankind, fo they have been prepofteroufly combined together, and 
conne6lions frequently imagined between certain ftars and parti- 
cular plants. This is one of thofe inftances, but too numerous in 

the 



Dr. Smith V Introdu^ory D'fcourfe, 5 

the hiftory of the human mind, of theory, hke an ignis fatuns, 
having led men aftray, and made them pay dear for a httlc real in- 
ftruclion, by bewildering them in endlefs errors and abfurdities. 
And fo hard is it to overcome prejudices, fan61ific'd in a manner by 
antiquity, that this idea of a connexion between ftars and plants, is 
only jufl got rid of in the moft enlightened parts of the world. 

But to confolc ourfelves under the contemplation of fuch humili- 
ating inftances of human weaknefs, let us turn our attention to the 
father of philofophy, at leafl of our philofophy, rifmg fo fuperiorto 
the darknefs in which he lived, darting his penetrating glance 
through all nature, and eftablifhing principles which a long couric of 
ages of enquiry have but confirmed. With Arillotle begins the real 
hiilory of fcience; and how much foever he may have erred on 
particular points, the greatnefs of his conceptions and the juHnels 
of his ideas on the whole, entitle bim to our high veneration, and 
we iliould corre£t his miftakes with awe. His labours in the in- 
veftigation of the animal kingdom have laid the foundation of the 
knowledge we now poffefs, and it cannot fufficiently be regretted 
that we have only an imperfeft account of his difcoveries. — Theo- 
phraftus, the worthy difciple of Ariftotle, has given us the firfl 
fcicntific views of the vegetable and mineral kingdoms. His works 
are indeed Ihort and imperfect fketches, but they are by the hand 
of a mafler. Thefe two great men ftand unrivalled as the only 
philofophical naturalifts of antiquity of whom we have any fatif- 
fa6lory knowledge. 

Several ages aftenvards came Pliny, that laborious compiler, 
whofe mind, too much occupied by a variety of purfuits, could pro- 
perly cultivate none. He has tranfmitted to us, as far as he was 
able, all that w^as known of Natural Hiftory, or rather all that had 
been imagined, at the time in which he lived. Whether Diofcorides 

lived 



6 Dr. Smith'j Inirodudlory Difcourfe. 

lived before or after him, and which borrowed from the other, the 
learned are not agreed, nor is it of much confequence to the re- 
putation of either. Diofcorides has had perhaps no great injuftice 
done him by a celebrated modern writer, who ftyles him '^ a great 
compiler of receipts." In fa6t his works are nothing elfe than a 
materia medica, in which he has enumerated all the natural bodies 
known at that time to have been ufed in medicine, with their ima- 
ginary virtues, but wdth fo little judgment, that it were charitable 
to fuppofe he meant only to colle6l the opinions of others, without 
ever attempting to exercife that faculty. How he came to be 
called the father of botany is wonderful to me. It is lefs extraordi- 
nary that he lliould, after the revival of learning, have had in- 
numerable commentators, becaufe his fhort and imperfe6l defcrip- 
tions would aiFord ample fcope to thofe who imagined all human 
wifdom to be contained in the obfcure works of men who had lived 
in the world a few ages before themfelves. 

That age of commentators we muft now confider. I purpofely 
pafs over thofe times of darknefs which followed the ruin of the 
Roman Empire, during which, if there were any fhadow of fcience 
in the world, it was among the Arabians, and they cultivated 
Natural Hiftory only as a branch of medicine. Thofe who wifh 
to ftudy this part of the hiftory of botany, will find ample fatif- 
fa6lion in Haller's Bibliotheca Botanica, where they may alfo fee 
an account of all the Greek and Roman authors who have at all 
touched on this branch of Natural Hiftory; and whom I have 
avoided mentioning, not only that I might keep within the bounds 
I had prefcribed to myfelf, but becaufe the labours of thofe 
writers do not appear to have contributed to the knowledge we 
now pofTefs. 

When learning began to ralfe its drooping head in the fifteenth 
century, thofe fciences of which moft traces were found in the 

writings 



Dr. Smith'j Introdu^.cry Difcourfe* *j 

Writings of the ancients began firft to be cultivated. Botany was 
more efpecially attended to very early, as medicine, which, however 
it might have been degraded in the ages of barbarifm, could never 
have been totally neglected, flood in immediate need of its aflifl:- 
ance. The works of the ancients, and particularly thofe of 
Diofcorides, were then ftudied with the moft pertinacious afTiduity ; 
remedies which this writer had recommended were deemed infal- 
lible, and virtues v/hich he had attributed to any plant, indifpu- 
table. The chief difficulty in almofh every cafe was to find out the 
plant he meant ; and this difHcuIty becoming at length fo great as 
to be abfolutely infurmountable, his commentators were loft in 
mazes of their own conjeclurcs. It was happy for the credit of 
Diofcorides that this was the cafe, and that the world were fo oc- 
cupied by this kind of criticifm, as feldom to have examined the 
truth of his afTertions. 

Of thefe commentators fome few had great original merit in 
giving figures of the plants of which they treated, and thofe figures 
are many of them executed with fuch perfedlion as to excite our 
aftonilliment ; they have rarely been excelled at any following 
period. The firft of thefe is Brunfelfius, whofe figures, although 
only wooden outlines, often exprefs the plant intended better than 
many fine modern engravings, and were evidently drawn by a firfl- 
rate painter. Matthiolus, the moft celebrated of all the com- 
mentators on Diofcorides, has likewife given excellent figures of all 
the natural fubftances mentioned in his book ; thofe of the two 
Venetian editions of this work are ftill the admiration of botanifls, 
and make thofe editions much fought after by coUedors. 

The large figures of Fuchfms are no lefs celebrated, nor with 
lefs reafon ; although only outlines, they reprefent the plants ex- 
tremely well. 

The example of thefe authors was foon followed by others, who 
4 publilhed 



8 Dr. Smith'j Introduclory Difcourfe, 

publifhed figures of plants from tbsir own obfervation ; and ever 
fince the middle of the fixteenth century the prefs throughout 
Europe has teemed with fmiilar publications ; certainly to the great 
advancement of botany, although the merit of thcfe works has 
been very various. 

For almoft two centuries after the revival of letters in Europe 
the attention of naturalifts was chiefly confined to the vegetable 
creation j and although fince that time the animal and mineral 
kino;doms have received an eminent decree of cultivation, ftill 
botany has always kept its ground. The infinitely varied beauties 
of the vegetable tribe have, in every country, engaged fome ingenu- 
ous minds in the contemplation of this branch of the great family 
of nature, and excited them to inveftigate the laws by which it is 
governed. Whether their laboui's have been crowned with the 
fmile of princes, rewarded with worldly honours and emoluments, 
or only deftined to enlrv^en the fcenes of rural retirement, to relieve 
the mind amid the bufy purfuits of active life, or add new charms 
to focial intercourfe ; they have never failed to carry with them 
their own reward, in that fweet and innocent pleafure which rifes 
under the fteps of the botanift wherever he goes, in thofe fublime 
and delightful ideas of the Author of nature to which fuch enquiries 
lead, and the complacency they always excite in the mind. 

The inflitution of public botanic gardens is a memorable sera 
in the hiftory of botany. The firft of thefe was, I believe, at Padua 
in iS33*j where it ftill continues to make a tolerable fio-ure, al- 
though now furpalTed by feveral others, which have had more 
powerful prote<5lors. The gardens of Florence, Pifa, Bologna and 
Leyden were foon after eftablitlied, and all ftill exift. Nor muft I 

* The eftablifliment of a botanic garden at Rome about the year 1450 feems not fuf» 
ficiently authenticated. See Sabbati Hortus Roxnanus. 

forget 



Dr. Smith'j IntroduSlory Difcourfs, 9 

forget to mention that we had at London a tolerable collection of 
plants in the garden of Gerard, a catalogue of which, printed in 
1596, cxifts in the Britifh Mufeum, but is elfewhere rarely to be met 
with. The fuccefs of botanic gardens has pretty much kept pace 
with the commerce of the countries in which they were eftablilhcd ; 
nor is this to be wondered at. The intercourfe of the Dutch with 
the Eaft Indies, and their pofleflion of the Cape, long gave their 
colle£lions, in all the different branches of Natural Hiftory, a decided 
fuperiority over thofe of other nations. The Englifli have now 
enriched their gardens far beyond any others by the fupplies ob- 
tained from the Eaft and Weft Indies, and efpecially from America. 

r find myfelf obliged to pafs over a number of naturalifts who 
flouriilied from the middle to the end of the fixtecnth ccnturv. 
Thofe whofe works are the mofl known, and have been of the moft 
fervice to the world, arc Tragus, Leonardus, Fuchfiu?, Dodonxus 
and Dalechampius in Botany, Bellonius in Ornithology, and Ronde- 
letius in Ichthyology. But there are a few great names which 
ought not to be fo flightly mentioned ; I muft be allowed to enlarge 
a little on the merits of Gefner, Aldrovandus, Clufius and Casfal- 
pinus. 

Conrad Gefner, the greateft naturalifl the world had feen fmcc 
Ariftotle, was born at Zurich in 1516, and died of the plague in 
1565. Not^vithftanding his conflitution was feeble and fickly, and 
his life by no means a long one, he applied himfelf to the (ludy of 
nature with fuch afTiduity, that he not only made more new obfer- 
vations than had been made by any modern writer, but alfo firfl 
reftored the fcience he cultivated to the dignity of philofophy, of 
which it had almoft loft fight fmce the days of Ariftotle and Theo- 
phraftus. Gefner cultivated medicine with equal fuccels, proceed- 
ing always on the fure ground of obfervation and experience. His 
health, naturally weak, is faid to have frequently fuffered by the 

C experi- 



JO Dr. SmithV Introduciory Difcourfe, 

experiments he made on himfelf. But his infirmities did not deter 
him from taking frequent and laborious alpine journeys, any more 
than his very confined circumftances prevented his being at con- 
fiderable, and at that time very uncommon, expcnces, in the ad- 
vancement of his darUng purfuits. He founded and fupported a 
botanic garden, kept a painter and engraver in his fervice, had a 
very confiderable hbrary, and, according to Haller, was the firfl who 
ever formed a mufeum of Natural Hill:or)\ But his greateft 
honour is his having firft fuggefted the idea of a methodical ar- 
rangement of plants according to clafTes, orders and genera, from 
the different ftru6ture of the flowers ; an idea which all true bota- 
nifts fince his time have purfued, and to which the very exiftencc of 
botany as a fcience is owing. 

Aldrovandus refembled Gefner in his indefatigable induftry and 
zeal for the advancement of Natural Hiftory. Like him he de- 
voted his life to travelling and ftudy, and like him eftabliihed a 
mufeum and undertook works whofe immenfity afionifhes as much 
as their erudition. But he did not pofTefs the fyftematic genius of 
Gefner, nor had he the prudence along with the liberality of his 
great contemporary. Although he had a fortune of his own, and 
was aflifted by many of the rich and powerful of his time, he was 
reduced to indigence towards the end of life. He lived to the age 
of 80, dying in 1605. His memory has been always much honoured 
at Bologna. The great zoological work which he left imperfect, was 
finifhed after his death, and his mufeum laid the foundation of that 
which at prefent is one of the ornaments of that univerfity. Many 
fpecimens flill exlft there marked with the venerable hand-writing 
' of their firft pofTefibr. 

Neither had Clufius that genius for arrangement for which 
Gefner was remarkable. Botany is however very much indebted to 
him for the publication of a vaft number of new plants, with excel- 
lent 



Dr. Smith'j IntroduSlory Difcourfe, ii 

lent figvires which atone for the imperfedlions of his defcriptions. 
His amiable difpofition, fays Haller, procured him a great number of 
friends, whofe difcoveries enriched his own works. He always ac- 
knowledged their favours, and gave to every body their due praife. 
A number of the plants difcovered by Gcincr were firft publifhed by 
Clufius. This illuftrious botanift died in 1609, at the great age of 
84. He was profelTor of botany at Leyden, where a palm tree (a 
caulefcent variety of Chamasrops humilis) planted by him, (till cx- 
ifls in great perfedion. 

I am now to fpeak of Cxfalpinus ; but if I ihould enter into a 
full difcuflion of his chara6ler and merits, it would lead me a great 
deal too far. His ardent attachment to Ariflotle led him into the 
depths of metaphyfics, and into many errors relating to the nature 
of man, and the firfl caufe of all things, which the dogmas of the 
court of Rome where he lived were not likely to correct, in a phi- 
lofophical mind like his. He has left evident proofs of his knowing 
the circulation of the blood at leafl through the lungs, and the fer- 
vices he has rendered to botany entitle him to be ranked among 
its mofl able promoters. I need not enter into the particulars of 
his method, which is chiefly founded on the fruit. He has made 
fome miftakes, which Haller has taken care to point out ; but it 
muft not be forgotten that Caefalpinus has thrown more light on 
the flru6lure and affinities of vegetables than any one before his 
time, and has diflin^lly mentioned the fexes of plants. He died 
in 1603. 

While thefe great men were flourifliing on the continent, botany 
began to be attended to in our own country. Turner publilhed his 
Herbal in 155 1 ; foon after Lyte gave a tranflation of Dodonasus; 
and in 1597 was printed the firft edition of Gerard's Herbal. It is 
fufficient that I mention the names of thefe authors. Lobel, who 
began to publilh in London in 1570, and who is the author of many 

C 2 good 



12 Dr. Smith'j Introdu6lory Difcourfe. 

good obfervations, has been often miftaken for an Englifhman ; 
but although he fpent the greater part of his hfe here, he was born 
in Flanders, 

It would be unpardonable if I were to finilli this period of the 
hiftory of our fcience without mentioning Fabius Columna, who 
iirfl gave copper plates of plants ; and thofe of an almoft unrivalled 
degree of accuracy, drawn and engraved by his own hand. In his 
Phytobafanos, publillied at Naples in 1592, and again at Florence in 
1744, he has taken infinite pains, and fliown great fagacity, in deter- 
mining fome plants of the ancients, and has deteded innumerable 
errors in Pliny and other authors. His Ecphrafis publiihed feveral 
years afterwards is a larger work, and contains a large number of 
new plants, diftinguillied and figured with the greateft accuracy. 
He is likewife the author of a curious and learned work on the 
Purpura of the ancients. All thefe books, efpecially the firft, are 
very rare. Columna, an able critic himfelf, was criticifed in his 
turn by one far inferior, Aldinus in his Hortus Farnefianus, printed 
at Rome 1625; a work in which however there are fome good 
figures of rare plants, and which is not commonly to be met with. 

The inftitution oi the academy of the Lyncsei at Rome in 1603 
deferves to be remarked, as that fociety was the firft of the kind, 
and has been in fome meafure the model of all the prefent literary 
focieties in Europe. Its chief promoter and perpetual prefident was 
Frederick Caefius, a young Roman nobleman of great fcience. 
Among the names of thofe who compofed it we find Fabius Co- 
lumna and the great Galileo, a circumftance perhaps more likely to 
immortalize its memory than the medals which were ftruck upon 
its eftabliihment. This inftitution died with its noble founder in 
1630. 

The number of authors who had written on plants without any 
fyftem or method in the fixteenth century, and the confufion of 

names 



Dr. Smith'j Introdudiory Difcourfe, , jj 

names which had been introduced j^ feemed to render it at length 
necelTary for the prefervation of the fcience that fome great fyfte- 
matic genius fhould undertake to digeft the confufed mafs, and pro- 
fiting of the hmts of Gefner and Caefalpinus, reduce into order 
the vaft materials, with which botany was in a manner over- 
whelmed, rather than enriched. But this event, fo much to be 
defired, was not yet to take place in its full extent. An eminent 
fervice was however rendered to botany by the two illuftrious 
brothers John and Cafpar Bauhin, with whom I Ihall clofe the hif- 
tory of the fixteenth century, and enter on that of the feventeenth. 
John Bauhin was in a great meafure formed as a botanift under 
Gefner, but not having a turn for fyflem, he did not in that refpc<5t 
learn much from his great teacher. He devoted a life of more than 
70 years to a critical inveftigation of all that had been written be- 
fore him, and made many valuable obfervatlons as well as many 
original difcoveries. But he opened no new path in botany. His 
labours were condu6led on the fame plan as thofe of his predcceflbrs. 
The fruit of his ftudies is nothing lefs than an Univerfal Hiftory 
of Plants, which being left in MS. at his death in 16 13, was not 
pubhllied till 1650, when it appeared in three volumes folio. Like 
all poflhumous works it has defeds, which probably it would not 
have had if publiihed by its author. It is a monument of labour 
and erudition, and contains fo much information andfo many eluci- 
dations of preceding authors, as to be ftill in great eilimation, not- 

withftanding its want of order and the rudenefs of the figures. 

This work paved the way for Cafpar Bauhin in the much more 
important and original one which he undertook and happily pej- 
feded, the publication of which forms one of the moil: remarkable 
aeras in botany, and which was firft printed in 1623, under the 
title of Pjnax Theatri Botanici. This was meant, as its name im- 
ports, as an index to all the botanical knowledge then in the world, 

2 and 



14 Dr. SMiTH'i Introdudlory Difcourfe. 

and its author exultingly flyles it the labour of 40 years. In this 
work about 60C0 plants are arranged in twelve books, with fome 
flight traces of fyftem, and each plant is diftinguiflicd by a kind of 
defcriptive name, under which are placed the names given it by 
every preceding author, Ray has very juftly remarked, thatbefides 
errors and repetitions incident to the moft wary in fo vail: an under- 
taking, Bauhin's Pinax contains fome hundreds of plants there 
mentioned as fpecies, which have (ince been found to be only varie- 
ties ; and if this was true in the time of Ray, it is much more fo at 
prefent. Notwithftanding fuch imperfe6tions, this work has been 
found fo ufeful, and indeed fo necelTary, that it continued the gene- 
ral dictionary of botanifls, till fuperfeded by the publications of 
Tournefort and Linnaeus, and is even now the only refource of thofc 
who wilh to fludy the authors whofe works are prior to it. But this 
is not all which the active mind of Cafper Bauhin undertook. He 
publiflied an excellent edition of Matthiolus with many additions; 
and has illuflrated about 600 new or heretofore miftaken plants in 
his Prodromus, publifhed firft in 1620, and afterwards with an im- 
proved edition of his Pinax, in 167 1, which is that moft in ufe. 
He likewife meditated a complete hiftory of all the plants men- 
tioned in his Pinax, and finilTied, as it is faid, three books, of which 
the hrft only was publiilied by his fon in 1658, with figures. It 
contains graffes and fome liliaceous plants. Befides all thefe bota- 
nical labours, Cafpar Bauhin praclifed medicine with great fuccefs, 
and was fo eminently fkilled in anatomy as to have been ftyled in 
his time the prince of anatomifts. He died in 1624, aged 64, being 
about 20 ye^s younger than his brother. I have feen a great part 
of his herbarium at Bafil, in the hands of Mr. De la Chenal, pro- 
fefTor of botany there. This herbarium is ineftimable on account 
of the difficulty of determining many of Bauhin's plants by his 
defcriptions alone, and its worthy pofTcfTor devotes it to the pur- 

pofes 



Dr. Smith'j IntroduElory Difcourfe, 15 

pofes of public utility, to which indeed all trcafures of fcience ought 
to be devoted. 

We muftnow make apaufein the hiftory of botany. Notwith- 
{landing the labours of the Bauhins feemed to promife new vigour 
to this lovely fcience, it languiilied for nearly half a century after 
the time in which they lived. Not that there were no botanical 
Avriters, nor any coUecEtors of plants in all that period, for there 
were a confiderable number of both, as well as feveral writers on the 
materia medica. Hernandez was fent to South America by Phihp II. 
at a vafl expence, but the fruit of his labours is one of the worfb 
books in botany. The Italians puzzled themfelves and their readers 
about opobalfamum and the ingredients of the mithridatc ; and a 
number of inferior writers appeared in different parts of Europe, 
efpecially in Germany, whofe names and merits I might be excufcd 
mentioning, even if on this occafion I had much more time allowed 
me. 

I mull: only except Jungius, who in his Doxofcopic-c Phyficae 
Minores has given great proofs of botanical fagacity, and has thrown 
out fome hints, of which following botanifls, and among them 
Linnaeus himfelf, has profited with great advantage. Jungius died 
in 1657. 

Our countryman Parkinfon was alfo an author of great origi- 
nality and obfervation, much fuperior in this refpe<5l to Gerard, or 
his commentator Johnfon, although his figures are inferior to theirs. 

I fhall profit of this interval to review the progrefs of zoology from 
the middle of the fixteenth to the end of the feventeenth century. 

It is remarkable that a part of natural hifloiy, fo evidently the 
moft important and the mofl interefting to man, who is himfelf at 
the head of the animal creation, fhould have lain fo long unculti- 
vated. From the time of Ariftotle to Gefner and Aldrovandus, 
little or no improvements were made in the knowledge of animals, 
nor with refpe6t to clafTification was any alteration attempted till 
the time of Ray. The Ariftotelian divifion of animals into vivi- 
parous 



1 6 Dr. Smith'^ Introdudiory Dlfcourfe. 

parous and oviparous is well known. In the former clafs were ar- 
ranged all quadrupeds, and in the latter birds, fi flies and infetEls. 
Ariftotle was himfelf fenfible that this fyftein muft be taken with 
fome latitude, there being feveral quadrupeds, as lizards, which 
are not viviparous, and fome infe6ts and fiihes viviparous, although 
not quadrupeds. By infeds he and all other naturalills down to 
Linnaeus underftood fuch of the fmaller kinds of animals as have 
the body divided into fegments, fo that many worms and even fillies 
were included in this divifion. 

Gefner arranged his voluminous hiftory of animals upon the 
principles of Ariftotle, feparating the oviparous from the viviparous 
quadrupeds ; and Aldrovandus colledled all that others had written, 
indeed without fufficient difcrimination of truth from fi6lion, and 
difpofed it much in the fame order. With refped to Ornithology, 
Gefner cultivated that fcience with peculiar fuccefs, and is the au- 
thor of many very valuable obfervations. Aldrovandus copied him 
in many things, and Johnflon is hardly worth mentioning, as he 
has done little elfe than copy both. Befides what the authors 
above mentioned have given us relating to fifhes, that branch of 
natural hiftory was ably handled by Paul Jovius, an Italian phyfician 
of great tafte and learning in the beginning of the fixteenth century; 
afterwards by the accurate Bcllonius, who wrote alfo on birds ; by 
Salvianus in his fuperb book on aquatic animals, printed at Rome in 
1554; ^^'^^ ^y Rondeletius, profeffor at Montpelicr, who publiihcd 
the fame year. Infedls were alfo particularly treated of in a work the 
joint labour of feveral able men, among whom was the indefatigable 
Gefner; this book was publifhcd by Dr. MoufFet, an EnglilTi phy- 
fician, in 1634. 

This was the ftate of Zoology when our own immortal Harvey 
firft dared to controvert one of the docSlrines of Ariftotle, which, 
although really unworthy of fo great a philofopher, nobody had 

hitherto 



Dr. SmithV Inirodudiory Di/cowfe, ij 

hitherto oppofed, I mean that of equivocal generation. The mcta- 
phyfical quibbles which had fo long difgraced the fchools, began 
now to give way to a fpirit of enquiry and obfervation ; but not in 
the fchools themfelvcs, for from thence light fcldom fprings. The 
propofition of Harvey, " omTiia ex ovo^ was not received without op- 
pofition ; but this was forgotten in the much more furious oppo- 
fition given to his other more important and interefling do6irine, 
of the circulation of the blood. No fooner \vas this publifhcd 
than a crowd of adverfaries befet him. After in vain endeavouring 
to refute his opinion, they had recourfe to the common fubterfuge 
of denying its originality ; taking upon themfelves the greater re- 
proach, of having been blind to the evidences already exifting of fo 
indifputablc a truth, rather than allow their illuflrious cotcmporary 
any merit in the difcovery. 

With Harvey begins what may be called the phyfiologlcal period 
of Natural Hiftory. His hypothecs of generation was confirmed 
by the experiments of Redi and Malpighi, two very philofophical 
naturalifls, who have difencumbered fcience from many prejudices, 
and thrown much light on fome of the mofl abftrufe parts of phy- 
fiology. The experiments of Redi to difprove equivocal genera- 
tion, are truly admirable, and Malpighi's invefligations, relating to 
the anatomy and transformation of filkworms, and the develope- 
ment of the chick in the egg, are too celebrated to need any frelh 
eulogium. About the middle of the feventeenth century a new 
and very interefling proportion in phyfiology was flarted, that of 
the fexes of plants, the honour of which is given to our country- 
man Sir Thomas MiUington. It is to be wiflied however that he 
had written fomething himfelf upon the fubject, or that we knew 
whether the idea were really originally his own. Nearly about 
the fame time the difcovery of the lymphatic veiTels in animals was 
made, either by Rudbeck or Thomas Bartholin, or rather by both 

D at 



i8 Dr. Smith'^ IntroduSiory Dlfcourfe, 

at once. All which I think juflifies me in calhng the period of 
which I am fpeaking, a phyfiological age. In it was laid the foun- 
dation of almofb every 'do6trine which has fmce heen cultivated 
and enlarged upon, and on which all following medical and phyfi- 
ological fy ftems have been built. 

It is no wonder that fy Hematic Zoology Ihould derive advantage 

from all thele difcoveries. Towards the end of the lafl: century 

appeared two great naturalifts, amply qualified to profit by them, 

and to whom the fcience is infinitely indebted, our countrymen 

Willoughby and Ray. Thefe illuflrious friends laboured together 

with uncommon ardour in the ftudy of nature, and left fcarcely 

any of her tribes unexplored. But death, which fo often difap- 

points the fairefl hopes, cut off the former in the prime of life, 

before he had digefled the materials to the acquifition of which he 

had devoted his youth ; and they might all have been loft to the 

world and his name have periihed with them, but for the faithful 

friendChip and truly fcientific ardour of Ray. So clofe was the in- 

tcrcourfe between thefe two naturalifts, that it is not eafy to affign 

each his due {hare of merit. Indeed Ray has been fo partial to the 

fame of his departed friend, and has cherilhed his memory with 

fuch afFe6tionate care, that we are in danger of attributing too 

much to Mr. Willoughby, and too little to himfelf. Certainly 

however it is by no means a fair ftatement of the cafe to i^ w^fh 

Dr. Derham, that Mr. Willoughby had taken the animal kingdom 

for his tafk, as Mr. Ray had the vegetable one. The Ornithology 

and Ichthyology fufficiently fhew that Ray was not a mere editor of 

thofe noble works, and the Synopfes Avium & Pifcium, publifhed 

fome time after, in which he has made many improvements, and 

fome important changes as to arrangement, prove with how much 

attention he had ftudied thofe two branches of Zoology. I need 

not add that the Synopfis of Quadrupeds is, as to method, entirely 

% his 



Dr. Smith's IniroduBcry Dijlourfe. i^ 

his own, although Willoughby is there often quoted for many ex- 
cellent obfervations ; and the fame may be faid of the Hiftoria Infec- 
torum, publifhed in 1710, after the death of Ray. All thefe works 
are excellent in their kind, admirably methodized, and exhibit fuch 
proofs of accurate obfervation, fuch a candid love of truth, and fuch 
penetration in difcovering it, as muft ever rank their authors among 
the iirfl and moft philofophical naturalifts. 

Ray, being diffatisfied with Ariflotle's claflification of animals, 
was the inventor of a new one, founded on the ftru6lure of the 
heart. The Harveian experiments and do<5lrine of the circulation 
had called the peculiar attention of philofophcrs to every organ 
which has a fhare in that phenomenon, and to this caufe probably 
we owe the method of Ray. Taking therefore the divifion of ani- 
mals into Sanguinea and Exanguia, which was a very ancient one, 
he fubdivides the firft dais into fuch as are furnidicd with lunrrs 
and fuch as breathe by gills ; and the former of thefe lie again 
feparates into thofe which have an heart with two ventricles, and 
thofe whofe heart has only a fmgle ventricle. The latter divifion 
contains Reptiles, the former viviparous Quadrupeds, Whales and 
Birds. The Animalia branchiis refpirantia include all Fifhes pro- 
perly fo called, the Whale kind and all the Exanguia being of 
courfe excluded. The Animalia Exanguia are divided into greater 
and leffer. The latter divifion contains Infects ; the former is again 
fubdivided into three genera, the firft of which includes the Mollia, 
or Mollufca, as Cuttle-fifh and Polypi ; the fecond Cruftacea, as 
Crabs and Lobfters, which are properly Infe6ts ; and the third Tef- 
tacea, or {helhfilh. This fyftem, although liable to a great many 
obje6lions, which I fhall not now flay to enumerate, is deferving in 
many refpe6ls of great praife : its author has fhewn great fkill in 
the chara6ters by which he has chofen to difcriminate the fubordi- 
nate divifions, and in (hort the Linn^an fyflem of Quadrupeds is 

D 2 little 



# 



20 Dr. SmithV IntroduBory Difcourfe. 

little more than a reformation of that of Ray. I fliall foon fpeak 
of the botanical merit of this great man ; but before we take leave of 
this period of Zoology, it may be expected t-fhould fay fomething 
of Leeuwenhoek, and his theory of generation, which has made fo 
much noife ; nor may it be ufelefs to mention him, if only as a 
memento to future theorifts. What a pity it is, that {o excellent an 
obferver, to whom the world is indebted for fo much folid phyfio- 
logical information, ihould have produced an hypothefis, whofe 
celebrity fee ms but to have haftened its refutation, and configned it 
to more abfolute negle<Sl ! The fpermatic worms of Leeuwenhoek 
may perhaps be the jeft of philofophers many ages to come, while 
others fhall profit of his genuine difcoveries, without knowing to 
whom they are obliged. 

Let us now take a general view of the flate of Natural Hiflory at 
the end of the laft centuryr*""^^"' '^'¦' •"' " 

In England the flattering afpe^ which this fcience had worn 
under the aufpices of Charles I. was blafhed by the turbulent times 
which followed ; but in the peaceful days of Charles II. natural 
hiflory, as well as all the different branches of philofophy, received 
a degree of cultivation and advancement hitherto unknown in this 
country ; and this led on to the golden age of fcience in England, 
which was crowned by the pofTeffion of a Newton. 

The Royal Society, which, from a fmall beginning at Oxford 
about the year 1645, made rapid advances when removed to the 
metropohs, was eflablifhed under the protection of the king in 1662,- 
very foon after his reftoration. This learned body beflowed great 
attention from the beginning, as they have ever fmce done, upon 
the phyfiological part of natural hiflory. The names of Boyle, 
Evelyn, Hook and Needham, are among the firft members of this 
fociety ; and how much they have laboured in the advancement of 
natural fcience is well known, Mr. Willoughby was one of the 

original 



ITr. Smith V Introdu^ory Difcourfe. it 

original fellows of the Royal Society, although his friend Ray was 
not admitted till the year 1667. ^^'^ Lifter, the great conchologifl:, 
tvas very early aflbciated with it, as well as that admirable vegetable 
phyfiologift Dr. Grew. 

Nor was France behind-hand with England in attention to the 
fciences, and among the reft natural hiftory. Henry IV, that 
great name which fcience delights in joining with humanity to 
blefs, had endeavoured long ago to promote literature and ufcful 
knowledge throughout his dominions. Among other inftitutions 
the botanic gardens of Paris and Montpellier are owing to his mu- 
nificence. But his untimely death, and the fubfequent diflur- 
bances, for a while put a ftop to all farther cultivation oi the 
arts of peace. About twenty years afterwards, by the indefatigable 
perfeverance of De la Broffe, fuperintendant of the Paris garden, the 
Cardinal de Richlicu was induced to grant it his protc6\ion; but 
this garden firfl rofe to any confiderable degree of eminence towards 
the end of the laft centuiy under Louis XIV. This munificent 
prince encouraged learning with that fplendid liberalrt)^ which dif- 
tinguifhed all his actions. For the purpofe of promoting botany, 
and enriching the royal garden, the illuftrious Tournefort was fent 
to the Levant, and the accurate and indefatigable Plumier made 
three voyages to America, and died as he was about undertaking a 
fourth. An Academy of Sciences was inftituted at Paris in 1666, 
and another fome years after at MontpeUier^ very fimilar to the 
Royal Society of London, with which the greatefl men in Europe 
have always been proud to be aflbciated. 

Many fimilar inftitutions were fet on foot throughout Europe, 
as the Imperial Academy Naturae Curioforum, begun in 1652. A 
number of botanic gardens were alfo eftabliitied in Germany ; but 
Linnaeus has truly obferved that they have never been rich in 
exotic plants, on account of the fmall intercourfe of that country- 
wit h 



z% Dr. SmithV Intfodudiory Difcourfe, 

with the Indies ; whereas the gardens of Holland were at this time 
overflowing with riches from the moft diftant parts of the globe. 

The Amfterdam garden under the care of the Gommehns was 
now one of the firft in Europe, and that of Leyden was rendered 
celebrated bj the catalogue publilTied by Herman. Holland had 
moreover the glory of producing at this time that moft fumptuous 
and excellent work, the Hortus Malabaricus ; by which a new world 
was in a manner laid open to the botanifts of Europe, and from 
which they learned with furprife, that the knowledge of plants had 
made almoft as much progrefs in the remote regions of Afia, as in 
their own part of the world. 

But the ftudy of nature was no where making fuch an uniformly 
fteady progrefs as in Sweden. At Upfal, under the aufpices of the 
great Rudbeck, was laid the foundation of what Mr. Stillingfleet 
has juftly called an -dnrivalled fchool of natural hiftory, and which 
was deftined afterwards to give laws to the reft of the world. Rarely 
has fuch a variety of profound and extenfive learning been united 
as in Rudbeck. I have already mentioned his anatomical merit in 
difcovering the lymphatics. In antiquities, efpecially thofe of the 
northern nations, and in the learned languages, his knowledge was 
unbounded. In botany he had ere6led to himfelf what might 
reafonably have been thought a <' monumentum asre perennius,'* 
in one of the greateft undertakings of the kind, a colle6lion of fine 
wooden cuts of all the plants then known. They were to have 
been arranged and named according to Bauhin's Pinax, in 12 large 
volumes folio. But two volumes were fcarcely printed, when in 
1702 a dreadful fire reduced almoft all Upfal to afhes, and with it 
the work of Rudbeck, and many thoufand wooden blocks already 
cut, befides almoft all the materials of an hiftory of Lapland com- 
ppfed by his fon, who indeed had a principal hand in the great 
work of which I am fpeaking. It can fcarcely be thought an im- 
peachment 



Dr. SmithV Introdudlory Difiourfe. a3 

peachment of the venerable old man's philofophy, that fo cruel a 
difappointment foon brought him with forrow to the grave. 

All that remains of this work are a few copies of the fecond 
volume, and three only of the firfl, one of which is in the Sherar- 
dian library at Oxford. Lmnxus was pofTefled of about 120 of the 
wooden blocks of this firfl volume, as well as 8 or 10 unpublilhcd 
blocks belonging to fome intended one ; all which came with his 
colle6lion into my hands : they are for the mod part admirable 
figures of gra{^es*^^ 

Having been now infenfibly led back to Botany, I fhall take a 
compreheniive view of the fyftematic jcra of that Icience, when fo 
many new methods of clafTification were invented, mofl of which 
were ftrenuouily fupported by their refpe^live authors, who little 
thought that in the fpace of half a century, oblivion would nearly 
level all difl:in6lions between them. 

The firft who revived the idea of a clafiical arrangement of 
plants, fince the time of Caefalpinus, was Morifon, who has been 
juftly cenfured for neglecting to acknowledge how much he owed 
to his ingenious predeceiTor, and who has in his turn received fimi- 
lar treatment from his followers. His method was founded chiefly 
on the fruit, to which, as well as the external habits oi plants, he 
paid too much regard, and too little to the other parts of fruc- 
tification. The only work claffed according to the method of 
Morifon is his own Hifloria Univerfalis Plantarum, an ufeful 
compilation, which is daily ufed as a book of reference, by thofe 
who never think of his fyftem. 

But the three principal fyftematic authors were Ray, Tourncfort 
and Rivinus, between whom was much warm controverfy on the 
fubjedl ; and it mud have been an interefting matter indeed that 

* Publifhed under the title of Reliquiae Rudbeckianse, folio, 1789. 

could 



24 I^R' SmithV Introdudiory Dlfcourfe, 

could fo agitate the candid peaceable fpirits of Ray and Tourneforf:. 
Of Ray it may be faid that his method was the moft abftrufe and 
fcientific, while that of Rivinus was at iirfl fight more fimple, but 
liable to as great difficulties in the execution. The former was prin- 
cipally founded on the fruit, the latter on the corolla, and in both 
were the other parts of fru<5lification too much negle6led. The 
fyftem of Tournefort, which was likewife formed chiefly upon the 
corolla, was undoubtedly far fuperior to all the reft then extant; 
yet I doubt whether that alone would have procured its author his 
extenfive reputation, had he not inveftigated and difcriminated the 
genera of plants in fo mafterly a manner, that this alone is fufficient 
to rank him above all preceding botanifts. It is true he did not 
invent a mode of fyftematically defining thefe genera by words ; this 
was referved for Linnaeus : but it has been well obferved by 
Monfieur Delamarck, that Tournefort was no lefs fenfible of the 
diftin6tions of his genera, and he has caufed them to be figured in 
fo able a manner that they cannot be miftaken. 

This great botanift, chiefly unfortunate in having had fome in- 
judicious advocates, is the glory of the French nation. His country- 
men are with reafon proud of him, and his merits as a botanift and 
a traveller are fo well known, that no commendation of mine can 
add to his fame. Yet I mufl: not omit to do juftice to his fucceflbr 
Vaillant, whofe merit I think is hardly fuflaciently known. In 
profiting of the indulgence granted me when at Paris of confulting 
the Herbariums of thefe two eminent botanifts, I was aftonillied at 
the inftances of profound knowledge and acutenefs of judgment 
which I met with in that of Vaillant, both with refpe6l to the 
genera, fpecies, and fynonyma of plants ; whereas it is well known 
that Tournefort was lefs folicitous about the fcientific diftin6lions 
of fpecies. Vaillant is alfo one of the fir ft who was well acquainted 
with the fexes of plants. His academical oration on that fubjecl 
is full of good obfervations, though not without fome errors. In 

this 



Dr. Smith V Introdudlory Difiourfe, 25 

this work he laughs without referve at Leeuwcnhock's peculiar 
theory of generation, and fpeaks rather too difrclpc^lfully of 
Tournefort ; for this he has never been forgiven. 

There were at this time feveral botanical fyftems invented befides 
thofe above mentioned ; but few being remarkable for originality or 
ufe, I cannot dwell long upon them. Herman's was one of the 
beft. It was entirely founded on the fruit, and not very difterent 
from thofe of Ray and Morifon. Boerhaave's had great merit, in 
being founded more or lefs on all the parts of fru6lification. The 
method of Chriftopher Knaut is an alteration of that of Ray, 
without any improvement. The paradoxical Chriftian Knaut, 
who thought the effence of a flower confiilcd in its corolla, was 
never very famous, and would now probably make no profclytes 
at all. 

A fuigular fyflem was invented by Profeflbr Magnol of Montpcl- 
lier, founded on the calyx, to w^hich Linnasus was very partial, and 
he even formed a fmiilar method of claflification himfelf : happily, 
however, this was not the only one he ever invented. 

Nor was this aera of botany merely a fyftematic one. Linn^us 
has not fcrupled to afTert, that within the fpace of 20 years, at the 
end of the laft century, t%vice as many plants were difcovered as 
had been made known by the joint labours of all preceding botanifts. 
Befides thofe w^iich were colle6ted by Tournefort, Plumier and 
Ray, a noble colleclion was brought from Jamaica by Dr. Sloane, 
afterwards Sir Hans, of which the hiftory in two volumes folio is well 
known. Mr. Sherard conful at Smyrna, who cultivated botany 
with princely munificence and with the ardour and difcernment of 
a true philofopher, has been the means of making known a very 
great number of plants. His vail herbarium and library are now 
among the literary treafures of Oxford. The indefatigable Plukenet 
procured and publifhed an immenfe number from all parts of the 

E world, 



2.6 Dr. SMiTfi'i Intraduclory Difcourfe. 

world, many of them very rare. His book is in every body's hands, 
and it would be fuperflnous here to fay any thing of its utihty. 
Petiver was no lefs perfevering in making coliedlions, not only of 
plants, bnt of all kinds of natural objects. His works are of a very 
peculiar charaftcr, and exhibit more zeal than genius or ac- 
curacy. His rough criticifms of his contemporary Plukenet have 
hurt nobody but their author. The acquifitions of Dr. Herman in 
Ceylon were very confiderable. They lay a while dormant, only to 
appear with greater celebrity from the pen of Linnaeus. In fo bril- 
liant a period of the hiftory of this fcience I am obliged to pafs 
over many lefs illuftrious, although great names; and lliall only 
mention Rumphius, whofe ardour was not to be damped even by 
the greatefl misfortune which can befal a naturalift, the lofs of 
fight. The rich treafures of Amboina were made known to us by 
this laborious man. His book on fhells is in high eflimation ; and 
his Herbarium Amboinenfe might vie with the Hortus Malabaricus, 
if all concerned in the publication of it had performed their parts 
as well as he has done his : but the figures are by no means com- 
parable to thofe oi that ftupendous work. The courage of Rum- 
phius in purfuing natural hiflory after he had loft his fight, re- 
minds me of a fimilar inftance, I believe very little known, of a 
Proven9al phyfician named Reboul, who undertook a manufcript 
hiftory of plants in feveral large folio volumes, and, becoming blind, 
actually completed many of the unnniihed chapters with his own 
hand after that accident. This curious manufcript was Ihewn 
me in the publick library at Parma. 

While Botany was making this great progrefs, Entomology began 
to be cultivated with an affiduity, which was amply repaid by the 
curious and aftonilhing facts it brought to light. The notion of 
equivocal generation having been refuted by Harvey, Rcdi and Mai- 
pighi, the propagation and metamorphofes of infeds became an 
2 iuterefting 



Dr. SmithV Introdudlofy Difcourfe, 27 

interefling obje6l of enquiry with feveral able men, among the 
iirfl of whom were Gocdart and Swammerdam. The difcoveries 
of Gocdart were received with laudable caution by his contempora- 
ries, efpecially what relates to the hiftory of Ichneumones ; but 
foilowing obiervers have confirmed the accuracy of his relations. 
The works of Swammerdam are full of curious information, and 
will fufficiently reward thofe whofe patience is not to be exhaufled 
by his tedious heavy ftyle. Nor mull 1 forget Madam Mcrian, 
whofe excellent work on the Surinam Infe(5ls, one of the moil 
fplendid in natural hiftory, is a monument of female perfeverance 
and enthufiafm. 

Other admirers of nature have turned their attention to fliclls 
and marine produi5lions ; and the facility with which thefe bodies 
are preferved in cabinets, has made the colIc<Sling them very 
general. A few authors had vvrittcn on fliclls about the bc2;inning 
of the laft century, as Aldrovandus, Columna, Imperati, &c. but 
about the end of the century two very eminent writers were par- 
ticularly diftinguiihed in Conchology, Bonanni and Lifter. Their 
works are in daily ufe. In the different publications of the latter 
are many curious anatomical obfervations, and Bonanni has treated 
the formation of iliells in a very philofophical manner. Some in- 
terefting hints on the fame fubje6l are to be found in Steno's " De 
Solido intra Solidum Differtationis Prodromus," printed at Florence 
in 1669. 

Of all the parts of Natural Hiftory, Mineralogy for a long time 
made the floweft progrefs. From the time of Theophraftus to the 
end of the feventeenth century few improvements were made in 
the knowledge of Foftils. What little was written in all that 
time contained only repetitions of old erroneous fuperftitious 
opinions. Even at the period of which I am fpeaking, a 
ftriking idea of the darknefs of this fciencc may be formed, from 

E 2 Tourne- 



a8 Dr. Smith'j Introdu5lory Difcourfe^ 

Tournefort's having maintained the vegetation of flones, and 
Lifter's having pofitively afTerted that all extraneous foffils, as petri- 
fied Ihclls, &c. are only lufus nature, and never were the real (hells 
they reprefent. Afterwards Mineralogy w^as cultivated with a little 
more care, but ftill on wrong principles, the external figure of 
foflils being principally attended to, and not their component 
parts; nor was it till very lately that the fcience was eftabliihed on 
its true foundation, that of chemical analyfis. 

For about fifteen years after the beginning of the prefent century 
nothing very confiderable was printed in botany. But the year 
17 1 8 is remarkable for the publication of Ruppius's excellent 
Flora Jenenfis, and the following for the appearance of Scheuch- 
zer's inimitable Agroftographia and Dillenius's Flora Giflenfis. 
Ruppius being cut off early in life, difappointed the hopes which 
were formed of him. Dillenius is one of the moft illufhrious names 
in botany ; not fo much indeed for fyftematic or phyfiological 
merit, as for accuracy of obfervation and judicious criticifm. 
About this time alfo flourifhed Pontedera at Padua, who although 
a great Tournefortian, and ftrangely prejudiced againft the fexes of 
plants, was a fcientific botanift, and is very liberally praifed by 
Linn^us, againft whom he is faid neverthelefs to have written 
fomething, which was never publifhed. 

The removal of Dillenius to England, who publifhed here his 
excellent edition of Ray's Synopfis Stirpium Britannicarum in 1724; 
the aftiftance and encouragement given to the fcience by thofe two 
diftinguiihed brothers William and James Sherard, as well as by 
Sir Hans Sloane, feemed to promife the eftablilhment of the botanic 
fceptre in this country ; efpecially as the infufficiency of Tourne- 
fort's fyftem became every day more obvious, and Boerhaave was 
too much occupied by medicine, to devote any confiderable fhare 
of his powers to any other purfuit. The phyfick garden at Chel- 
4 fea 



Dr. Smith'/ Intro duBory Dtfcourfe. ^ 

fea was in a very flourifliing ftafe under the care of the celebrated 
Miller, and that of Mr. Sherard at Eltham contained one of the 
choiceft colle6lions in Europe, But botanifts were almoft: at a ftand 
about arrangement. All the different fyftems which had been 
propofed, however fpecious in univerfity le6lures, having been 
found very infufficient for the purpofes of praclical botany, the 
fcience was again in danger of relapfing into anarchy and confufion, 
and botanifts were almoft overwhelmed with the riches which daily 
flowed in upon them. 

In this ftate of things a new turn was given to the fcience of 
botany, and indeed to all natural hiftoiT, by the publication of the 
Syftema Naturas and Fundamenta Botanica of Linnasus in 1735. 
Nor w^ere the learned world determined how they lliould receive 
thefe extraordinary produ<Slions, when in 1737 the fame author, 
without any other fupport than his own tranfccnJcnt merit, fixed 
the attention of all Europe, by his Critica Botanica, Genera Plan- 
tarum, Hortus ClifFortianus, Flora Lapponica and Methodus Sexu- 
alis; five works, the produce of one year, each of which would 
alone have been fufficient to have immortaUzed its author, and in 
the compofition of which a man's whole life might have been 
thought ufefully employed I 

Having by a number of original obfer\^ations, added to thofe of 
formef writers, demonftrated the fexes of plants, and confequently 
the importance of their ftamina and piftilla; Linnaeus founded his 
fexual fyftem on the differences in number, fituation and proportion 
of thefe organs : a fyftem which, although profefTedly merely ar/i- 
fclaly is really in many refpe6ls more agreeable to nature than many 
which had preceded it, and wliich, for facility and univerfality, has a 
decided fuperiority over all hitherto invented. But this was only a 
part of the praife of this rifmg genius. Having new modelled and 
fyftematically defined all the known genera of plants, he endeavoured 

in 



^ Dr. Smith'j IntroduSlory Difcourfe^ 

in like manner to define the fpecies upon philofophical principles ; a 
thing hitherto unknown, or at leaft but faintly attempted by fome 
old botanifts. Of the fuccefs of Linnaeus in this undertaking, as 
well as his judgment and accuracy in collecting fynonyms, the 
Hortus CliiFortianus and Flora Lapponica afford fufficient proofs. 
In them may be feen the dawning of thofe talents which afterwards 
produced the Species Plantarum ; while the dida6tic precifion and 
critical acutenefs of the Fundamenta and Critica, gave a foretafte 
of that perfe6lion which was hereafter to appear in the Philofophia 
Botanica. 

Nor were the abilities of Linnaeus lefs confpicuous in his diftri- 
bution of the animal kingdom. Of this the firfl edition of the 
Syflema Naturas was but a fketch, which was afterwards corre6led 
and much enlarged. It is unneccflary here to enter upon the 
particulars of his fyftem, which has-been familiar to all naturalifts 
for thefe 50 years. I ihall only fay? that what in my opinion are 
the beft parts of it, the clafTes of birds and infe6ls, were altogether 
original. For the dete6fion of the effential character of the latter 
in their antenna, we are entirely obliged to Linnaeus ; and his fub- 
ordinate diftindtions were not only the firft, but long experience 
has proved them the beft, that have ever been invented. 

His arrangement of foiTils, the beft at the time it was firft pub- 
liftied, is now generally neglected. Although in fome inftances 
founded on chemical principles, in others the moft obvious laws of 
chemiftry were facrificed to external figure ; and the fcience havincr 
been of late years fo totally reformed, it is no wonder that Lin- 
naeus's Regnum Lapideum is become obfolete. 

This illuftrious man, returning in 1739 to Sweden his native 
country, there fixed the throne of Natural Hiftory. Soon after his 
arrival he helped to lay the foundation of the Academy of Sciences 
at Stockholm, of which he was the firft prefident. His diftin- 

guiihed 



Dr. SmithV Introdu^ory Difcourfe, ^x 

guifhed merit and amiable manners procured him the favour of the 
rich and powerful, as well as the attention and admiration of the 
fcientific; and his medical and botanical le6lures at Upfal foon at- 
tradled a number of ftudents from all 'parts of the world, and ex- 
alted that univerfity to a degree of fame hitherto unknown. 

It is true, 4ie did not efcape the attacks of envy and jealoufy ; 
nor can any exalted character, however inoff'enfive and prudent, 
hope to efcape them. But they never put him fo much off his 
guard as to wafte his time in controverfy, nor would he give his 
adverfarics immortality, by tranfmitting their names to pofterity 
with his own. I fliall on the prefcnt occafion follow his example; 
nor drag from obfcurity works long fmce forgotten, or authors 
who never were noticed. I cannot butohfcrve, however, that pro- 
feflbr Siegefbeck, notwithftanding his intemperate zeal in attacking 
the fexes of plants and Linnxus's fyllcm with all the arms he 
could mufter, both facred and profane, was hy no means the mod 
contemptible of all the authors on that fide the queflion. He 
has been unfortunate enough to be always held forth as the botanic 
Zoilus ; but I think there have been fome critics, even in our own 
country, who for futility, ignorance and malevolence, would have 
much greater claims to that title, i^ they were of confcquence 
enough to claim any title at all. 

We muft now confider fome of the mofl eminent naturalifts 
who were contemporaries with Linnaeus in the beginning of his 
literary career, and whofe labours tended eflentially to the advance- 
ment of the fcience. It would be endlefs to enumerate all who 
have cultivated or written upon natural hiftory during this golden 
age; we can only notice a few of the mofl diftinguifhed. 

His mofl intimate companions at this time were Artedi and Gro- 
novius ; the former of whom has in his Ichthyology difcovcred fuch 

talents 



32 Dr. Smith'j Introduciory Difcourfe, 

talents for natural hiftory, that his premature death cannot be 
fufficiently regretted. Gronovius has contributed in various ways 
to the advancement of the fcience. His Flora Virginica and his 
zoological works are ccjftrudled upon Linnaean principles. 
He was always in amicable correfpondence with Linnaeus ; as con- 
ftant in the offices of friendiliip as deaf to the impulfes of envy and 
jealoufy. It was Gronovius who had the honour of naming the 
Linnsea after his illuftrious friend. 

One of the greateft and moft extenfive geniufes of this or any 
age was Haller, that great phyfiologift and unwearied obferver, 
who, though at firft the friend, afterwards became the rival, and 
the only refpe6table rival, of Linnaeus, compared with whom all 
his other criticks fmk into nothing. What a pity it is thefe illuf- 
trious men were not always friends ! What a pity the memory 
of Haller (hould have been difgraced by the publication of thofe 
confidential letters, the revifal of which one would have thought 
fufficicnt to dlfarm the moft inveterate mind ! 

" Tantaene animis coeleftibus irse ?" 



I muft however refcue the name of Haller as much as poffible 
from this foul ftain. On a careful enquiry among thofe who 
alone could fatisfy me on the fubje£t, I am inclined to think his 
powers of body and mind were fo enfeebled that he may be faid to 
have been not himfelf at the time thefe letters were publiHied, and 
probably never revifed them. Elfe can we fuppofe a character 
like his would fo grofsly have violated, not only the confidence of 
friendfhip, but even the laws, of paternal affedion ? for in that 
colle(Slion are letters of one of his fons, then no more, which no 
father ought to have made publick. Perhaps the temptation of 

producing 



Dr. Smith'j IntroduBory Di/courfg, 33 

producing fuch teflimonies of his own celebrity was, in the weak- 
nefs of old age, too flattering to that vanity from which Haller is 
acknowledged not to have been free. Neither was Linnaeus himfelf 
without his fliare of it ; and if vanity were never found but with 
fuch prctenfions, who would not ahnoil forget that it were a 
weaknefs ? 

I cannot attempt to enumerate all the works of Haller, much 
lefs to difplay their merits. His hiflory of the Switzerland plants 
is one of the mofl excellent and complete Floras the world ever faw 
and is only deprived of the general applaufe it deferves, by the 
author's unconquerable diflike to the Linnacan clafTification and 
nomenclature, by which his work is rendered extremely unfit for 
common ufe. His Phyfiology, Bibliotheca Anatomica and Biblio- 
theca Botanica, are among the moii flupendous monuments oi 
human knowledge as \\ ell .0 of human labour. They defy imitation 
and ftrike criticifm dumb. 

Another diflinguifhed name alfo claims our attention, that of 
Reaumur. I know none more worthy to Hand next to Haller, 
Befides the various difcoveries of this great French naturalift which 
%vere of immediate ufe in improving the arts and manufactures of 
his own country, the philofophical world at large will ever be in- 
debted to him for his invcftigatlons of fome of the mod intricate 
parts of natural hiftoiy. His experiments on digeftion, on the 
fruClification of marine plants and on corals, are all celebrated, 
although with refpeCl to the latter he was miftaken in denying 
their animal nature; but his immortal wprk is his " Memoires 
pour fervir a THifloire des Infe6les," in 6 volumes, quarto; and he 
has pubiiihed a variety of detached pieces relating to the fame 
fubje6l. 

The Italians pofleffed a fimilar genius to Reaumur in Vallifneri, 
whofe experiments relating to generation, and his candour in giving 

F up 



34 Dr. SmithV IntroduUory Dlfcourfe. 

up his firft opinion on that fubje6l, merit great commendation, as 
well as his inveflio-ations of inteflinal animalcula. VaUifneri was 
profefTor of the practice of medicine at Padua, and died in 1730. 
His works, being only in Italian, are not fa much read as they 
defer v^e to be. 

The fame country had the honour of producing another moft 
excellent obferver in Micheli of Florence, whofe Nova Genera 
Plantarum, publifhed in 1729, is a fundamental book in botany; it 
has the rare merit of being a work of original and accurate obfer^ 
vation in the mofl difficult of all plants, graffes, moffes and fungi. 
If Dillenius and Linnasus had paid due regard to his obfervations, 
they would not have fo totally mifunderftood the fru6lification of 
mofles as to take the capfule for the anthera. The world may flill 
hope for more information from this excellent man, on the publi- 
cation of his manufcripts, now in the hands of Mr. Targioni Toz- 
zetti, the worthy pofTeiTor of all his remains. 

This leads me to mention the Hifloria Mufcorum, publifhed by 
Dillenius in 1 741, that matchlefs work which, for the accurate 
delineation and determination of fpecies, has never been rivalled in 
any department of botany, much lefs in that which it illuftrates. 
This author has made the intricate tribe of moffes and algas com- 
paratively eafy ; without fuch a writer they would all probably have 
continued the opprobrium of botany, as fungi and confervas are 
ftill. 

A work w-orthy to be compared with this of Dillenius, for the 
more than Herculean labour which was employed in its compofition, 
is the Hierobotanicon of Olaus Celfius, profefTor of divinity at 
Upfal, and one of the firft and warmefl patrons of Linnaeus. He 
travelled to the Eafl on purpofe to enquire into the plants of fcrip- 
ture, the determination of which was his darling obje(5l for more 
than 50 years. His book was not efteemed as it deferved till its 

author 



Dr. SmithV Introdudlory Difioiirfe, 35 

author was no more. There having been but 200 copies printed, it 
is now very rare, anci is one of thole works which are oftencr 
talked of than read. 

I Ihall only at prefent mention the names of two more writers, 
who chictiy diftinguifhed themfelves in vegetable phvfiology, Du 
Hamel and Hales. One of them was the ornament of France, and 
the other of our own country, about the period of which I have 
been fpeaking, and both have rendered great fervices to philofo- 
phical botany. 

In the mean while Linnaeus was daily advancing in fcience and 
reputation. His Fauna Suecica appeared in 1746, and his Materia 
Medica in 1749 ; the former is a model of defcriptive zoology, as the 
latter of methodical arrangement and concifenefs. They were both 
afterwards very, much imfiroved and enlarged, but the Materia 
Medica was never icpubliuiud by Linnxus ; all the new editions of 
it are by Profeflbr Schreber, and the alterations are his own. 

In 175 1 appeared the Philofophia Botanica, and two years after- 
wards the firft edition of the Species Plantarum ; two works which it 
were equally vain and fuperfluous to attempt to praife as they 
deferve. I fhall only remark that the introdu6lion oi trivial names ^ 
which firft took place in the Species Plantarum, was one of the moft 
happy inventions of Linnaeus, and I am perfuaded it has con- 
tributed more than any thing elfe to make his works of general 
ufe. Even thofc botanifts who from envy would never openly 
adopt them, have given the mod convincing proofs of the im- 
portance of which they thought them, in labouring to deprive 
Linnaeus of the honour of their invention ; and I could mention 
inftances of people, who have written againft thefe trivial names, 
being obliged to recur to them daily in fpeaking and writing of 
plants. 

The fame of Linnaeus was now fo widely difFufed that, as his 

F 2 excellent 



36 Dr. SmithV Introdudlory Difcourfe. 

excellent biographer Dr. Pulteney has obferved, he began fcarcely 
to feel the difadvantages of his northern fituation. He had dif- 
ciples in every part of the world who vied with each other in fending 
him all the objects of natural hiflory they could procure, fo that 
his cabinet and his garden were equally enriched. At the fame 
time mod of the learned focieties in Europe were proud to enrol 
him among their members, and even kings contended for the pof- 
feflion of him. He was amply indemnified for declining the 
generous offers of the Spanifh monarch, by the honours and ad- 
vantages heaped upon him by his own fovereign. He received the 
rank of nobility, which in Sweden is neither a trifling nor a barren 
honour, and was made a knight of the Polar Star. This was the 
firft inflance of that order having been conferred upon literary 
merit; certainly it could never have been bcflowed with greater 
propriety on any one than on Linnaeus, who was himfelf that 
bright polar ftar to which the fcientific world looked up for aflifl- 
ance and dire6lion. 

This then may be reckoned the moft flourifliing period of 
Natural Hiftory, when difputes about methods and fyfliems being 
for the mofi: part laid afide, every admirer of Nature's works was 
employed in practical obfervations and difcoveries ; vvhile Linnseus, 
whom nothing efcaped, and to whofe decifion all doubts and dif- 
ficulties were referred, fupervifed and methodized the whole. His 
improvements had fo much facilitated the ftudy of botany, that it 
was no longer an abftrufe fcience confined to the fchools, but 
became an agreeable amufement to perfons of leifure in all ranks 
and fituation s. 

About this time fome moft fuperb works in natural hiftory 
were given to the public which, although not very fyftematic, were 
of ufe to the fcience ; as Seba's Thefaurus Rerum Naturalium, the 
firft volume of which appeared in 1734, and the fecond in 17353 

the 



Dr. Smith's Introdudlory D'fcourfe, vj 

the two following ones not having been publilhcd till many years 
after; Catefby'sNaturalHiftoryof Carolina, Florida, &c. of which the 
firfl: volume was printed in 1731 and the fecond in 1743 ; Edwards's 
Hiftory of Birds, begun in 1743 ; and fome others of Icfs note. A 
work of a fuperior kind was publithed at Florence in 1742, entitled 
Gualtieri Index Teftarum Conchyliorum, which is remarkable for 
the perfection of its fpecific differences of fliells, in which the 
author feems clofely to have imitated the ftyle of the botanical 
works of his countryman Micheli. This is one of the mofl ufcful 
books of reference that we have in conchology, and in my opinion 
is far preferable to the work of d'Argenville printed the fame 
year, although perhaps lefs complete than the new and enlarged 
edition ol that book lately pubiillicd. 

In England horticulture feems now to Iiave made great progrefs* 
Few have improved t:...; ...i io much as the celebrated Miller ; imd 
it is hardly fair to reproach him with not having perfected it* 
Bartram was fent to America for thepurpofe of fupplying our 
gardens with plants, and we are much indebted to him, as well as 
to Houftoun, who difcovered many rare vegetables in South America 
and the Weft Indies, and whofe remains, long negle<5led, are now 
refcued from oblivion. 

In Holland botany was ably fupported by the labours of the twc^ 
profeflbrs Van Royen at Leyden, and the affiduous Burmaa 
profeilor at Amfterdam. The Thefaurus Zeylanicus and Decades 
Plant. Africanarum of the latter are excellent books; fome of the 
figures in this laft which I find Linnaeus fufpecled to be erroneous, 
or even fi6litious, have fmce been found faithful. Burman had 
alfo the honour of publiihing a large volume of the figures of 
Plumier, from copies of the original drawings, which had long 
lain buried at Paris, as the greater part of that admirable author's 
works ftiil do, eclipfed by more fplendid produtSlions. 

6 la 



38 Dr. Smith' J Introduclory Dlfcourje. 

• In Germany ProfelTor Ludwig of Leipfic was now in great repu- 
tation ; and he has fhewn himfelf an able phyfiologifl and accurate 
obferver. He profefTed to differ in many points from Linnaeus, 
but oppofed him with decency; and indeed it appears, as a noble 
author of our own country has lately remarked, that Ludwig, as 
well as Haller, were only " Linna^ans in difguife ;" they profited 
of the lights they had received from him to build fyftems to rival 
his own. 

No where have the Linnasan improvements been more flowly 

received than in France, which is to be attributed not only to the 

jealoufy of that nation for the fame of her immortal Tournefort, 

but alfo to her pofTefTrng fome confummate botanifts, of fufficient 

confequence to fupport for a time any fyftem they fhould choofeto 

cfpoufe. Among thefe the family of the Juflieus claim the firfl 

place, and efpecially Bernard de Juflieu, a name never mentioned 

without refpe6l. Even at Paris however Linnaeus had early an 

illuftrious proteclor in the Duke d'Ayen, now Marechal de 

Noailles, who correfponded with him long, procured him the notice 

and favour of the late king, and occafioned his majefty to fend him 

a prefent of feeds from his own garden at Trianon. The work 

of Adanfon has alfo done fervice to the Linnaean caufe, althoup^h 

certainly that was what its author lead intended ; but this is one 

of thofe books every reader of which muft diffent from the author's 

opinions. In the fouth of France Linnsus had more admirers. 

ProfefTor Gouan of Montpellier has adopted his principles both in 

his ichthyological and botanical works ; and the excellent Gerard in 

his Flora Galloprovincialis, although he has not followed the 

fyflem of Linnaeus, is every where clofely attached to his principles, 

and has ever been an enthufiaftic admirer of his merit. Nor mufl 

I forget ProfefTor Sauvages of Montpellier, who generoufly pre- 

fented Linnaeus with his whole herbarium, rich in the plants of 

that 



Dr. SmithV Introductory Difcourfe. 39 

that delightful country; nor his friend Monficur Lc Monnicr, one 
of the warmeft admirers of the illuftrious Swede. This ecntleman 
was fent to the fouth of France as a botanift in 1740, with fome 
other philofophers who went there for agronomical purpofes. 
Afterwards he became hrft phyficlan to Louis XV. and now enjoys 
his " otium cum dignUate " in a delightful retirement near Vcrfailles, 
wiiere he pays particular attention to the cultivation of trees and 
fhrubs, and poffefles one of the richeft herbariums in France. 

At Berlin botany and Linnaeus had long a noble fupport in 
Profeflbr Gleditfch, who firft principally diftinguiHicd himfelf by 
anfwering Siegefbeck's criticilm of the Linnosan fyftem ; and his 
victory was decided indeed when Siegefbcck publilhed his Vanilo- 
queniic^ Gledlifchiancs Specimen, in the firfl paragraph of which that 
writer gives him what may almofl; be called " the lie direct." 
But Gleditfch was ];ott:r employed than in returning it. He ap- 
plied himfelf to the inveftigation of the obfcure phyfiology of 
Fungi and other orders of the Cryptogamia, and in 1753 publilhed 
"an able and elaborate work, entitled Mcthodus Fungorum. The 
Memoirs of the Berlin Society abound with excellent treatifcs of 
this author relating to agriculture and rural oeconomy. Nor did 
he negle6l fyftematic botany. By no means a fervile follower of 
Linnaeus, he publifhed in 1764 a fyftem founded on the fituation 
of the ftamina, the principle of which is good, and muft always be 
kept in view by all botanifts; but the claflcs of Gleditfch being 
folely founded on this circumftance, are neceflarily too few : his 
orders are borrowed from the clafles of Linnaeus. 

Botanical works were daily multiplying ui various paits of Europe. 
In 1745 appeared Leche's Primitiae Flors Scanicoe, and Seguier's 
rich catalogue of the Plantas Veronenfes. It has been alledged by 
fome faftidious people, that the prefent century, and efpecially the 
Linnaean age, has been overburthened with fuch kind of catalogues, 

3 whicli 



4© Dr. SmithV Inirodudiory Dlfcourfe, 

which require no abilities intheircompofition, andanfwernopurpofe 
when done. A French writer, whom I am tired of naming, has 
declared himfelf of this opinion ; and his own pradlice has been fo 
conformable to it, that he has never favoured the world with an 
account of the plants of Senegal, a country which he went pur- 
pofely to inveftigate. Happily all good botanifts have not imitated 
him, or we fhould never have feen Scopoli's ineftimable Flora 
Carniolica, the various Floras of AUioni, De Gorter, Gunner, 
Hudfon, Gouan, Leers, PoUich, Weis and many others, which 
have been of great ufe to local, and indeed general botany ; and 
even if every one of the valuable works jufl mentioned had been 
ufelefs, who would not have thought them fufficiently atoned for 
by the Flora Lapponica and Flora Suecica of Linnaeus ? 

I am now ltd to confider the fervices rendered to natural hiftory 
by the various difciples of this eminent man, and others, who have 
undertaken hazardous and laborious journeys, on purpofe to ex- 
amine the produ6lions of countries hitherto not at all or but 
flightly inveftigated. And what praife does not the ardour of fuch 
a6tive promoters of fcience deferve ? As no one ever felt more of 
this ardour than Linnaeus, when the humble attra6lions of an 
ar6tic flora incited him to undertake his painful Lapland tour ; fo 
I think none has been fo fuccefsful as this great man in exciting 
the fame fpirit in others. Before I fpeak of his pupils, however, 
the order of time obliges me to mention Buxbaum and Gmelin. 
The former may be flightly palTed over. He was fent by the 
Peterfburg Academy to coliecl plants in the Levant. The fruits 
of his labours are publiilied in five Centurise, with wretched plates 
and very indifferent defcriptions. The fame fociety were much 
more fortunate in their choice of Gmelin to undertake the 
examination of Siberia. That country had before been vifitcd by 
Gerber and fome other botanifts, but their acquifitions were 

trifling 



Dr. Smith'j Inirodtidlory Di/courfg, a\ 

trifling compared with thofe of Gmelin, who fpent lo years, viz. from 
1733 to 43 in Siberia. His Flora Sibirica, now increafed to four 
volumes quarto, with an immenfe number of figures, and excellent 
defcriptions and fynonyms, is one of the befl works of the kind, 
and contains many very rare plants. Philip Frederick, the brother 
of this author, has written Otia Botanica and fomc other things. 
Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin, fon of the lall: mentioned, is celebrated 
for his hiftory of the genus Fucus, printed at Peterfburg in 1768. 

The expedition of Ternflroem, one of the firft of Linnxus's 
difciples whom the fpirit of curiofity led to vifit countries far 
remote from his own, was an unfortunate one. This young man 
undertook a voyage to China in 1745, but died at Poulicandor. 
We have no hiflory of his voyage. His memory is honoured 
with a plant in the Supplementum Plantarum at the infligation of 
Mutis, for Linnaeus himfclf had not an high opinion of his merit. 

Kalm, who vifited North America in 1747, was more fortunate. 
His travels are fo well known, from the account of them tranflated 
into Englifh, that I need fay little about them. His botanical dif- 
coveries very materially enriched the Species Plantarum of his 
great mafter, and the Linnasan Herbarium abounds with fpeci- 
mens brought home by him, diflinguifhed by the letter K. His 
own colle6lion of dried plants is faid to be mouldering away in 
Sweden, in 

. _. . «t The lumber garret of his wifer heir." 

HafTelquifh vifited Egypt and the Holy Land in 1749. ^^ one 
has fhewn greater zeal or activity than this ingenious young man, 
whofe premature death cannot be too much regretted. He was 
alike fkilful in zoology and botany, as the account of his travels 
publilhed by Linnaeus, and fmce tranflated into Englilh, fufficientJy 
fhews. In vain has an invidious author, who has bimfelf long en- 

G ' ' joyed 



42 Dr. SmithV Introdudlory Difcourfi. 

joyed an iinfubftantial reputation, endeavoured to blaft the memory 
of Hafrelquift. His calumnies have been refuted by Dr. Sparrman, 
who has juftly defended his countryman. 

Ofbeck, another traveller well known in England from the 
tranflation of his voyage, went to the Eaft Indies in 1750, as chap- 
lain to a SwedilTi fhip. He fpent fome time in China, of the natu- 
ral hiftory of which he has told us much, and has made known 
many new plants, among which is the Ofbeckia. 

Loefling, a favourite difciple of Linnaeus and an excellent botanifl, 
undertook the examination of Spain in 175T, where he found many 
new and rare plants, and probably would have made many more 
difcoveries, had his flay been longer in that rich, and hitherto al- 
mofl unexplored country ; but he left it for one ftill more intereft- 
ing. South America, where he would, no doubt, have made a rich 
harvefl, had his life and health been continued 5 but he was foon 
cut off at the age of 27. His letters and botanical defcriptions 
have been publiflied by his illuftrious mafter, who, in this inftance, 
as well as on every other occafion, has given proofs of that fend- 
bility which mufb ever make him as dear to humanity as to fcience. 

I forbear to enlarge upon other expeditions of lefs note, as thofe 
of Montin and Solander to Lapland, Bergius and Falk to Goth- 
land, &c. although each contributed to the general ftock of natural 
knowledge very much. It is to be regretted we have not had 
more information from Rolander, who vifited Surinam and St* 
Euftatia in 1755* He fent home indeed feveral curious infedls, 
mentioned in the Syftema Naturae ; but I find, by a letter of 
Linnseus to Gerard, that he efteemed Rolander the firft entcmo- 
logift after Reaumur. A pupil of Linnseus, named Martin, vifited 
Spitzbergen in 1758 : he mull: not be confounded with Martens, 
who went to the fame country in 1671, and whofe rude figures 
are quoted by Linnaeus. I muft not omit Toren, who went twice 

to 



Dr. SmithV IntrodtiSiory Di/courfe. ax 

to the Eafl Indies, and defcribed his whole voyage in letters to 
Linnaeus, enriched with many obfervations relating to natural hii- 
ftory, all which were publiflred with Olbcck's voyage, and tranf- 
lated into Enghfh by Dr. Forfter. 

I am led to confider fome of the moll: illuftrious naturalifls of 
the prefent age, whofe works and whofe difcoverics have been long 
{o generally known as almoft to preclude the neceflity of mentioning 
them, were it not necelTary to the uniformity of my plan. Of 
thefe Profeflbr Jacquin claims the firft place. He was firft known 
by his Hiftoria Plantarum Americanarum, publilhcd in 1763, in 
folio, with many figures, and which contains defcriptions of a vail 
number of plants of South America, fcarccly ever fccn by any body 
elfe. This book has lately been republifhed, without any material 
addition, except that the plates are coloured; for its illu/lrious 
atithor has of late years applied himfelf to the improvement of 
botanical ichnography in the molt eminent manner. "Who has 
not feen and admired his Hortus Vindobonenfis and Flora 
Auftriaca ? And we have now no longer to regret the want of 
differentia Jpccijica in the works of Jacquin ; for, with a degree of can- 
dor which does him the higheft honour, he has deigned to liflen to 
the remonftrance of the younger Linnaeus on this fubjed:, and has 
given the eflential characters of all the plants figured in his Icones 
Plantarum rariorum. 

Another celebrated work is Brown s Hiflory of Jamaica, publiflied 
in 1756, and now veiy rare, as the copies remaining at the book- 
feller's, after the firft fale of the book, were burnt. Its elegant 
plates were drawn by Ehret, the beft botanical draftfman of his 
time. The herbarium of Dr. Browne, who is ftill living in 
Ireland, was bought by Dr. Solander many years ago, and fent to 
Linnasus : the fpecimens are not fplendid, but important for the 
determination of many obfcure plants. 

G 2 Two 



44 Dr. Smith'j Introdu5iory Difcourfe. 

Two lupferb publications were fet on foot by royal munificence 
in Denmark, Regenfufs's hiftory of lliells, and the Flora Danica, 
The former has, I think, the fuperiority in point of execution over 
moft works in natural hiflory, except, perhaps, Baron Born*s ac- 
count of the lliells in the Imperial Mufeum at Vienna. The Flora 
Danica, while under the dire6tion of Oeder, was equally well exe- 
cuted ; but ProfefTor Muller, more of a zoologift than a botanift, 
continued it with lefs care and perfeclion. Its reputation will, I 
doubt not, foon be abundantly reftored by the abilities of ProfefTor 
Vahl, to whofe care it is now entruftcd. 

We muft now look back a little to endeavour to do juflice to 
fome great names in zoology. The age of Linnaeus has been no 
Icfs brilliant in this branch of natural hifbory than in botany; but 
before I enter upon the works of his immediate difciples or followers, 
I muft fpeak of his adverfary Klein, who objected to feveral of his 
alterations in zoology, with more reafon on his fide than any of 
the botanical opponents of Linnaeus ever had ; ftill his remarks 
have not been much attended to. He alfo, like all the other ad- 
verfaries of our great teacher, laboured to find out contradi6lions 
in his works ; as if the irregularities of Nature were to be laid to 
the charge of him, whofe works and whofe fyftem are often ob- 
fcure, merely from their confonancy with Nature. Klein deferves 
great praife for his multifarious works in zoology ; he has left 
fcarcely any part of the fcience untouched, and has treated it both 
fyftem atically and phyfiologically. 

I haften to a bright ornament of our own country, the ingenious, 
accurate and patientEllis, whofe difcoveries relating to corallines form 
one of the moft interefting events in the natural hiftory of the 
prefent century, and whofe name will ever be revered while fcien- 
tific or perfonal merit are held in efteem. Nor is it poflible for me, 
in paying this tribute to the memory of Mr. Ellis, to forget his 

friend 



Dr. Smith'j- Introducfory Difcourfe. 45 

friend and very counterpart Dr. Garden, to whom Linnariis was fo 
much obliged in his laft edition of the Syftema Naturae that I 
think no name occurs there more frequently. This gentleman, 
long refident in Carolina, is celebrated for his difcovery of the 
Siren lacertina, that hngular animal, for which Linnseus was ob- 
liged to form a new order in his fyftem. Dr. Garden is now re- 
turned to this country. Long may it be before I am at liberty to 
pay that unreferved tribute to his merit which I have given to the 
departed Ellis ! 

It is well known that Mr. Ellis was one of the firft who clearly 
made out the animal nature of corallines, and his opinion on the 
fubjedt is now univerfally adopted. In the beginning, however, he 
had an opponent in Dr. Barter, a Dutch naturalill, who main- 
tained a contrary opinion, and argued with great ingenuity for the 
vegetable nature of thefc bodies, alTcrting that the polypes were 
merely accidental inhabitants of them, and not a part of their fub- 
flance. The fame author has publiilied feveral other works on 
different marine infe6ts, worms and plants, under the title of Opufcula 
Suhfedvay which are elaborate and curious : they are the perform- 
ances of a real obferver. 

This intricate part of natural hiftor)' has been inveftigated by 
feveral other writers, as Bohadfch and MuUer ; but by none more 
ably than the celebrated Pallas, whofe fyftematic work on Zoophyta 
is necefTary to all who apply themfelves to this fludy. 

No branch of natural hiftory, after botany, has for fome 
years paft had more attention paid to it than entomology. Nor is 
this to be wondered at. Botany necelTarily leads to the ftudy of in- 
fedls ; for it is impofTible to inveftigate plants in their native fitua- 
tions, without having our attention perpetually awakened by the 
infinite variety of thofe a6live little beings, employed in a thoufand 
different ways in fupplying themfelves with food and lodging, in 

repulfing 



4^ Dr. Smith'j Introdudiory Dlfcowfe, 

repulfmg the attacks of their enemies, or in exercifing a more than 
Afiatic defpotifm over myriads below them. Thus many of the 
moft fyflematic botanifts of the prefent age, as Scopoh, Hudfon, 
.AlHoni, have been led to the fludy of entomology. Another clafs 
of authors have undertaken to publifh figures of infe6ts5 as Sultzer 
and Frifch, fometimes accompanied with t'heir hiftory at large, as 
in the excellent works of Roefel and Sepp. I doubt whether the 
coloured plates of the latter have ever been excelled in any depart- 
ment of natural hiftory. A moft elaborate work, confifting only of 
coloured plates of infe6l:s, was undertaken under the infpedion of 
Linnasus, by Clerck, the author of which dying foon after it was 
publillied, had time to colour a very few copies only, and thefe are 
much valued by the curious. In my opinion this work is more re- 
markable for labour than fkill, and is far excelled by that of our 
countryman Mr. Drury, which 1 hope I may, without being accufed 
of partiality, rank among the very firfl of its kind. I need fay 
nothing of Albin and Wilkes, whofe plates were admired in their 
time, but are now eclipfed by many. The Entomologia of Schaef- 
fer, the celebrated naturalift of Ratifbon, fo well known by his 
figures of Fungi, and other works, are very ably and carefully 
executed. I have only two more entomological writers to mention 
at prefent, but thofe are very illuftrious ones, GeofFroy and De Geer. 
The work of the former is an hiftory, in French, of the infexSls 
found about Paris, with a few excellent plates, chiefly as examples 
of the different genera. This with the Entomologia Carniolica of 
Scopoli, and the works of Linnaeus, are the claflical books indif- 
penfably neceflary to every fyftematic ftudent of European infe6ls. 
Thofe who with to ftudy their hiftory and metamorphofes more 
fully, will find ample fatisfadlion in the ineftimable work of De 
Gttx^ which is a counterpart of that of Reaumur, and equally ex- 
tenfive and accurate. Its author, a Swedifli nobleman, deferves to 

a be 



Dr. Smith'j Introdudiory Difcourfe, j^j 

be ranked among the mod able promoters of the fcience which he 
cultivated. 

I have before mentioned that the botanical fyflem o^ Linnaeus 
was not readily received in France. StiU leis regard was paid there 
to his zoological works; and this is principally to be attributed to 
the fuccefs of his great opponent the Count dc BufFon, whofe 
fplendid publications and captivating ftyle of writing, fo well calcu- 
lated to dazzle tlie multitude and to charm the people among whom 
he lived, engrofled all the attention of his countrymen, and have 
been admired throughout Europe. Indeed thofe who are lead 
partial to this celebrated writer muft allow that he has contributed 
much to encourage and promote the ftudy of nature, has made 
many valuable obfervations, and colle(5led a variety of intercfting 
fadls. We mufl remember however that the fa^fs of fo theoretical 
a writer are always to be received with caution : not that I would 
fufpe6l any philofopher of wilful mifreprefcntations, but a prudent 
theorift will fcarcely truft his own eyes; and the world are pretty 
well agreed that the hypothefes of Buffon are, for the moft part, 
the very effence of futility ; though feveral have laughed at them, 
itw have taken the pains to refute them. 

The French have long pofTefTed a more fyftematlc writer in 
BrifTon, whofe Regne Jnlmal has great merit, and whofe excellent 
and elaborate hiftory of birds, none who purfue that part of 
zoology can be without. 

England too has produced a genius, at leafl equal to the latter, in 
Mr. Pennant, who has almoil: exhaufted the three firft clafles of the 
zoology of Great Britain, and whofe name and works are too cele- 
brated to need my commendation here. - - - 

Before I return to Linnasus 1 mufl: mention the illuftrious Mr. 
Bonnet of Geneva, an enthufiaftic admirer of the works of nature, 
whofe candour and ingenuity cannot but obtain our efteem, whether 

wc 



4B Dr. Smith'j IntroduElory Difcourfe. 

we adopt his theories or not. This author is fo remarkably inat- 
tentive to nomenclature and fyflematic arrangement, that an acri- 
monious enemy of Linnaeus has quoted him as aflenting to his 
own illiberal fentiments of that great man ; but I am fure nothing 
could be more unjuft than to make Bonnet a partilan of fuch ani- 
mofity. Happy are thofc true philofophers, who, by an attention 
to the works of the Creator, are led, like this amiable man, to make 
themfelves better as well as wifer, and to difFufe not only knowledge 
but happinefs on all around them ! 

^ Linnaeus, whofe powers were beginning to decline, publiilied in 
1771 the Mantija altera^ which may be confidered as his botanical 
teftament. It is partly a colledlion of remarks and corre6tions 
made at different times, and contains, befides, defcriptions of a 
number of new plants, of which the rich communications of Dr. 
Mutis, from the continent of South America, make a confider- 
able part. This gentleman, and fome other Spanifh botanifts his 
friends, have had the good fortune of invcftigating the countries of 
Mexico and new Granada, hitherto little known to botanifts ; and 
the fruits of their induftry were all fent to Linnasus. Among 
them, the great variety of beautiful and very extraordinary new 
plants of the clafs Syngenefia are remarkable. The fineft of aU 
was honoured with the name of Mutifia, and publiilied by the 
younger Linnaeus in his Supplementum Plantarum, a work the 
foundation of which was laid by his illuftrious father not long 
before his death. I forbear to enlarge upon this melancholy 
period of the hiftory of our fcience, which deprived it of its bright- 
eft ornament. The circumftances of the death of Linnaeus, with 
the honours paid to his memory, are known to all ; nor need 1 on 
the prefent occafion make any artificial difplay of his merits, or of 
the lofs which fcience fuftained by his death. I am convinced none 
of my hearers has any thing to learn on this fubje6t, and I would 
7 rather 



Dr. Smith'j- Introdu^ory Dlfcourfe. ^.n 

rather prefer the more cheerful tafk of tracing the fuccefs of liis 
labours, and the efFe6l of the fpirit he had raifcd, in the enterprifes 
and difcoveries of many eminent naturahfts, feveral of them his 
immediate pupils, whofe defcrved fame refleded fuch diltinguilhed 
honour on the lad years of their great teacher. 

Here however a new difficulty prefents itfelf. In the former part 
of this difcourfe, having principally had'occafion to fpeak of authors 
no longer living, and known to us chiefly by their works, I have, 
to the bcfl of my judgment, given an impartial and unrefcrved ac- 
count of their merits. Glaring defects have been generally pointed 
out, but I have more frequently indulged in the more agreeable 
office of praifing merit of all kinds wherever it occurred. In {o 
doing I have not been a6luated by a fenfelefs veneration for former 
times, nor have I prepoilcroufly aimed by a vain and m{q\q,{% 

homage to 

•*' foothe the dull cold ear of death." 

To excite laudable emulation has been my only intention. But 
now that I find myfelf either treading (to ufe Dr. Johnfon's words) 
on afhes not yet cold, or am to fpeak of naturahfts with whom I am 
perfonally conne6led, and of others whofe approbation and efteeni 
I cannot but be anxious to obtain, even the juft tribute of applaufe 
might appear like fervile adulation. This confideration, added to 
my having already extended my difcourfe to an immoderate length, 
will I hope juftify me in touching now but flightly on many great 
names and many arduous undertakings, efpecially as I could but 
repeat fa61;s and circumftances familiar to all, and fhould run the 
rifque of exhaufting the patience of my hearers without giving 
them any information. I am perfuaded no one whom I have now 
the honour of addreffing needs to be informed of the merits of a 
Thunberg, Sparrman, Pallas, Fabricius, Swartz, or Hedwig, of the 
vaft phyfjological difcoveries of a Camper or Hunter, much lefs of 
the hberahty and extenfive knowledge of a Banks, or the genius 

H and 



MTSSOUBI 
BOTANTCA.U 



5© Dr, Smjth'j" IntroduBory Difcourfe. 

and worth of the ever to be lamented Solander. Who is not ac- 
quainted with every circumftance of that celebrated voyage round 
the world, which has enriched every branch of natural knowledge 
in fo eminent a degree ? Who has not obferved with pleafure the 
laudable emulation of a neighbouring country in promoting fimi- 
lar undertakings, to which we are indebted for the botanical ac- 
quifitions of Commerfon, Sonnerat^ Aublet and Dombey ? When I 
confider all thefe, added to the difcoveries of Pallas in Siberia, of 
Sparrman, MafTon and Thunberg at the Cape, and efpecially the 
acquifitions which the latter, undifmayed by the moft formidable 
difficulties, made in Japan ; when I contemplate the diftinguilhcd 
abilities of many other living naturalifts, the excellent publications 
of Schreber, Rottboll, Retzius, Allioni, Scopoh, Brouflbnet, L'Heri- 
tier, the philofophical Herman, and many others, not to mention 
fome in our own country which may vie with any of thefe, I am 
hiduced to confider the prefent age as one of the moft propitious to 
the ftudy of nature, on the moft folid and philofophical principles ; 
and when I look around me at home, and fee how very much the 
love of botany in particular, and the cultivation of plants, is in- 
creafing among perfons of rank and fortune, as well as the trea- 
fures which are daily enriching our gardens and cabinets, I cannot 
help indulging the moft. flattering hopes that my own country will 
foon in an eminent manner be diftinguifhed above the reft of 
Euope in thefe ufeful and pleafmg purfuits. But the degree of 
credit we have already acquired muft not lull us into a torpid 
fecurity. We muft keep in mind that France, our rival in power, 
is alfo our rival in fcience, and even at Paris Linnaeus has now his 
followers, who defpifing all national prejudices, dare to admire truth 
and genius wherever they find them. Let this excite in us a lauda- 
ble fpirit of emulation; not the narrow jealoufy which diftinguifties 
thofc, who, confcious of their own weaknefs or undeferved reputa- 
2 tion, 



Dr. SmithV IntroduBory Dtfcourfe. 51 

tion, dread every approach towards perfe6lion in others. All who 
purfue the fame fludies fhould labour together for the common 
good: every degree of afliftance, every deferved commendation 
wliich they give to each other, is the moft probable means of ad- 
vancing their own fame ; while every atom of ufurped honour, if it 
docs not immediately cover its vain pofTeflbr with opprobrium, is 
almoft certain to be deducted with intereft from his chara6ler by a 
difcerning and impartial poftcrity. 

Jt now only remains for me to point out what I conceive to be 
the peculiar obje6ls of our prefent inftitution. I need not enforce 
the propriety of each of us endeavouring to promote as much a* 
pofTible the main ends of our undertaking, and to contribute all in 
our power to the general flock of knowledge. Thefe arc indifpcnfa- 
ble obhgations upon all who aiTociate thcmfelvcs with any literary 
fociety. Thofe who do not comply with them incur difgracc in- 
ftead of honour, for a title is but a reproach to thofe who do not 
deferve it; nor can they have a fhare in the reputation of a fociety, 
who never in any manner contributed to its advancement. 

Befides an attention to natural hiftory in general, a peculiar re- 
gard to the produ6lions of our own countiy may be expedted from 
us. We have yet much to learn concerning many plants, which 
authors copy from one another as the produce of Great Britain, 
but which few have feen ; and our animal productions are ftill lefs 
underflood. Whatever relates to the hiftoiy of thefe, their ceco- 
nomy in the general plan of nature, or their ufe to man in parti- 
cular, is a proper obje6l for our enquiries. Of the produdlions of 
our own country we ought to make ourfelves perfedlly maders, as 
no natural objeCl can any where be fludied half fo well as in its 
native foil. This however not being always practicable, botanic 
gardens and cabinets of natural hiftory have been invented, in 
which the productions of the moft diftant climes are brought at 

H 2 once 



£2 Dr. Smith^j IntroduElory Dlfcourfe, 

once before us. No country that I know of can bear a comparifon: 
with England in this refpedl. The royal garden at Kew is un- 
doubtedly the firfi: in the world, and we have a number of others, 
both public and private, each of which may vie with the moil cele- 
brated gardens of other countries. Nor have we a lefs decided 
fuperiority in Cabinets. That of the Britilh Mufeum, which con- 
tains among other things the original herbariums of Sloane, 
Plukenet, Petiver, Kxmpfer, Boerhaave, of many of the difciples ot 
Ray, and feveral others, befides innumerable treafures of zoology, 
claims the firft place. That of the late Sir Afhton Lever ftands I 
believe unrivalled in birds and quadrupeds ; not to mention many 
others. But is it not a reproach to the naturalifts of Great Bri- 
tain that fo many rarities fhould remain in their hands undefcribcd ? 
that foreigners fhould eagerly catch at one or two plants obtained 
from our gardens, which we for years have been trampling under 
foot unnoticed ? Yet how, till now, could fuch nondefcripts have 
been made publick ? Large works in natural hiilory are expenfive 
and of hazardous fale ; few private people can undertake them ; 
nor has there hitherto been any fociety to which detached de- 
fcriptions could be communicated. It is altogether incompatible 
with the plan of the Royal Society, engaged as it is in all the 
branches of philofophy, to enter into the minutiae of natural 
hiftory ; fuch an inftitution therefore as ours is abfolutely necef- 
fary, to prevent all the pains and expence of collectors, all the ex* 
perience of cultivators, all the remarks of real obfervers, from 
being loft to the world. The flighteft piece of information which 
may tend to the advancement of the fcience we fhould thank- 
fully receive. However trifling in itfelf, yet combined with other 
fa6ts, it may become important. Whatever relates to the deter- 
mination of fpecies, even in the loweft and feemingly unimportant 
tribes of nature's works, ought never to be negle6ted. Nor let the 

humble 



Dr. SmithV Inirodu^cry Di/cour/e, 53 

humble and patient fludent of this very difficult part of natural 
hiftory be difcouraged by. the fneers of the fupercihous coxcomb, 
or of the ignorant vulgar. He who determines with certainty a 
hngle fpecies of the minuteft mofs or meaneft infedl, adds fo far to 
the general ftock of human knowledge, which is more than can be 
faid of many a celebrated name : no one can tell of what impor- 
tance that fimple fa6l may be to future ages ; and when we confider 
how many millions of our fellow creatures pafs through life with- 
out furnifhing a fmgle atom to augment this ftock, we flvdll learn 
to think with more refpecl of thofe who do. 

But nothing will be with more reafon expe(flcd from the mem- 
bers of this fociety than a flri6l attention to the laws and princi- 
ples of Linnasus> fo far as they have been found to be good. No 
where have his works been more fludied and applied to practice 
than in this country? nor can any other be fo competent to efti- 
niate his merits or corred his defects. I am perfuaded nothing can 
be done more ufeful to the fcience of natural hiftory than, working 
on the publications of this illuftrious man as a foundation, to en- 
deavour to give them that perfection of which they are capable? 
and to incorporate with them all new difcov^cries. Wc who have 
it in our power to give real information, ihould defpife the filly 
vanity of making new fyftems or arrangements, merely for the 
fake of being talked of. An artificial method like that of Linnaeus 
may be changed a thoufand different ways, and each feem beft to 
its inventor. If any one, defpairing of getting immortality by any 
other means, fhould pleafe to name Cryptogamiathe firft clafs and 
Monandiia the laft, I ihould rank him but with Chriftopher Knaut, 
who made about as wife an attempt upon the method of Ray. 

Whatever we may think of the fyftem of Linnaeus, there are 
certain great principles laid down by him, the excellence of which 
is now fo well known, and fo generally admitted, that none who 

4 pretends 



54 I^R* Smith'j IntroduBory Dlfcourfe, 

pretends to the name of a naturalift can avoid conforming to them. 
The laws, for inftance, according to which he con(lru6ted his 
generic names and fpeclfc differences^ which we fhould do well to 
imitate, although lefs flri6lly, in the application of trivial names. 
I hope never to fee any defcriptions fent into the world by this 
fociety without fpecific differences ; they are what diftinguilli a 
true fcientific naturalift from an empiric, and nothing but incapa- 
city in an author can make us pardon the want of them. Without 
a ftri6l attention to this maxim, the fcience will foon relapfe into 
its original barbarifm, nor can any thing but another Linnaeus 
reftore it. Let not the excellent work of my friend Mr. Latham 
be here cited againft me; for that ingenious author is too judicious 
to have negle6led this material point ; he is poflefled of the eUen- 
tial chara6lers of all his birds, and means to pwblifli them in a 
fyftematic form as a fupplement to his great work. I wifh I could 
make the fame apology for fome other eminent writers. But how 
would their works fhrink if reduced to Linnasan concifenefs and 
precifion ! 

A kind of knowledge which naturalifts have a right to expe6l: 
from us in a fuperior degree, is the accurate determination of the 
fpecies defcribed by Linnaeus, and indeed thofe of many other 
authors. Our accefs to the feveral original colle6tions I have men- 
tioned, to the immenfe herbarium of Sir Jofeph Banks, which 
contains the entjre colk<Stions of feveral celebrated botanifts, but 
more efpecially to the very herbarium and mufeum of Linnaeus 
himfelf, muft give us means of knowledge not to be had elfewhere. 
This is a fubjedt on which I fpeak with peculiar pleafure, as in this 
refpe6t I may hope to be infinitely more ufeful to the prefent in- 
ftitution, than could have been expected from any abilities of my 
own. A train of events, which I cannot help calling moft fortu- 
nate, having brought into my hands every thing which Linnaeus 

pofTefTed 



Dr. Smith'j Introdu6lory Difcourfe^ 5^ 

poflefTed relating to natural hiftory or medicine, his entire library, 
manufcripts, and the correfpondence of his whole life, as well as 
all the acquifitions made by the younger Linnseus in his tour 
through Europe, after his father's deceafe, but which his own 
premature death prevented him from communicating to the world ; 
all thefe will be a never failing refource to us in every difficulty, as 
well as a fund of information not eafily to be exhaufted. For my 
own part I confider myfelf as a truftee of the pubhc. I hold thefe 
treafures only for the purpofe of making them ufeful to the world 
and natural hiftory in general, and particularly to this fociety, of 
which I glory in having contributed to lay the foundation, and to 
the fervice of which I fhall joyfully confecrate my labours, fo long^ 
as it continues to anfwer the purpofes for which it is defigncd* 



( 57 ) 



II. Obfervations on fame Extraneous FoJJiIs of Switzerland ^ by M. Tingry» 
Foreign Member of the Linncean Society, Demonjlrator of Chemijiry and 
Natural Hijiory at Geneva^ &c. 

,;/ Read July 1,1 -M. 

L 'ETUDE de la mineralogie diffipe les doutes qu'on pourroit 
avoir fur les cataftrophes qui out bouleverfe le globe et fiilonne 
fa furface. Les blocs de granit detaches de leur maffe et tranfportes 
fur des terrains calcaires, les vegetaux, les animaux, les pierres 
roulees qu*on trouve dans fon fein a une grande profondeur, font 
des temoins irrefragables qui depofent fur le travail des eaux et fur 
les efFets d'immenfes courants. 

Mais ces materiaux epars que TacSlivite des naturaiiftes raffemble 
de toute part et qui invitent le philofophe a remonter aux caufes 
premieres de leur deplacement, n'ont point encore redreffe nos incer- 
titudes fur leur etat primitif, ni fur les epoques des revolutions qui 
les ont altere, modifie ou tranfporte fur un fol qui leur eft etranger. 
A cet egard, malgre tant d'hypotheies ingenieufes, dont quelques 
unes plus d'accord avec les vraifemblances, ont pu feduire, Tefprit 
humain paroit reduit a n'enfanter que de merveilleufes chimeres > 
tant nous fommes eloignes de connoitre tous les corps qui font fu- 
bordonnes aux loix de notre fyfteme, de fuivre leur marche et dc 
calculer leur influence fur ceux qui n'ont point echappe a nos in- 

ftrumens. 

I Gependant 



58 M. TingryV Obfervations 

Cependant les foins employes a recueillir ces materiaux diflemines 
n'ont pas ete infrutfliieux. S'ils nons paroilTent infufEfans pour 
nous eclairer fur les caufes eloignees qui les ont tourmente, du- 
moins peuvent-ils en demontrer des effets certains relativement a 
notre pianette. Ses quatre parties renferment dans leur fein des 
fubflances vegetales et animales qui font abfolument etrangeres au fol 
qui les enfouit. L'Amerique et notre Europe prefentent aux re- 
cherches du naturalifle des depouilles de corps organifes dont les ana- 
logues paroifient appartenir a I'lnde. II eft a prefumer que fi l*Afie 
et I'Afrique etoient mieux connues, quant a Thifloire naturelle? 
elles ajouteroient de nouvelles demonftrations aux faits deja en evi- 
dence, Les colle6lions deviennent done a cet egard des monu- 
mens precieux ou font infcrits, en cara6leres inefFa9ables, les preuves 
les moins equivoques des anciennes revolutions qui ont tourmente 
le globe. 

On a fenti que les corps organifes, enfouis a une profondeur inde- 
terminee, ont du eprouver des alterations plus ou moins achevees, a 
raifon de leur maffe, de leur organifation particuliere et de Tinflu- 
ence plus ou moins grande des matieres avec lefquelles ils ont ete 
confondus. G'eft de ce principe qu'on eft parti pour expliquer la 
formation des charbons fofliles, du bitume, de la poix, du petrolc, 
du naphte et des autres matieres minerales inflammables denuees de 
traces d'organifation. '- ¦•'-- 

Mais fur tous les points qui tiennent a i'hiftoire du globe la 
fcience ne fait que des pas bien lents. Avant qu'on ait pu admettre 
une theorie raifonnable fur une matiere qui demandoit une longue 
fuite d' obfervations, on croyoit implicitement que les bitumes etoient 
dus aux exhalaifons de la terre, que Telement terreux feul etoit le 
principe de leur formation, et qu'ils etoient a la terre et aux autres 
mineraux ce que Thuile effentielle, Thuile par expreflion font aux 
vegetaux et la graifle aux animaux. 

On 



on Extraneous FoJJi/s. r* 

On n'a pas tarde a eflimer a fa jufte valeur cettc opinion finguliere. 
Un feul raifonnement fuffifoit pour en devoilcr le ridicule. L'huilc 
eft un produit de I'organiiation : Jes corps prives d'organifation nc 
pouvoient done entrer pour rien dans leur formation ; aufli s'eft-on 
accorde a regarder le detritus des corps organifes enfevelis dans la terre 
par des caufes eloignees, comme etant la vraie matrice des bituracs 
fees et liquides, en admettant neanmoins, que les principes de ces 
corps organifes peuvent prendre, par la feulc influence des vapeurs 
minerales, des caracleres qui s'eloignent plus ou moins de la nature 
des fubftances produflrices. 

Ce font ces varietes obfervecs dans la nature des produits analy- 
, tiques des bitumes, charbons fofliles, &c. qui fervent dc bafe a i'hy- 
poth^fe adoptee par Mrs. Parmentier, de Fourcroi et autres natura- 
liftes. Suivant cette hypothefe les animaux ont autant ct peut-ctre 
meme plus contribue a la formation des matieres bitumineufes que les 
vegetaux. Les argumens qu'on oppofe en preuves font, que Ton 
trouve frequemment fur les premieres couches qui recouvrent les 
filons de charbon foflile, des depouilles d'animaux marins, et que 
ces depouilles y font plus abondantes qne les debris de vegetaux. 

Mais ces argumens ne font pas d'un auffi grand poids qu'on pour- 
roit, peut-etre, fe le figurer, fi Von fait attention a la nature de ces de- 
pouilles et aux efpeces de coquillages qui s'y rencontrent. Ce font 
des univalves, bivalves, et multivalves, de grandeur ordinaire, et fai- 
fant partie des bancs calcaires dont raccumulation paroit pofterieurc 
aeelle des vegetaux, puifqu'on les retrouve dans la continuation des 
bancs, et dans des directions oppofees a celles des filons de houille. 
Rarement, tres rarement rencontre-t-on des fragmens de ces grands 
ofTemens de cetacees qui, abondants en huile, pourroient juftiiier 
rhypothefe en empruntant les cara6teres de la probabilite. 

Quand les meditations les plus profondes fur cette partie de Thif- 
toire naturelle auroient refufe a la fagacite des obfervateurs la demon- 

I 2 ftration 



6o M. TiNGRY*^ Obfervat'wns 

ftration des preuves tirees de la feiile infpe6tion des charbons fofliks, 
pour faire dependre leur formation des feuls vegetaiix, il ne faudroit, 
ponr s'en convaincre, que fe reprefenter ce qui doit fe palTer dans une 
revolution telle que le celebre Pallas la fuppofe. Les debris de la 
furface du globe, ces forets immenfes arracbees de leur fol par la ra- 
pidite et la maffe des courants, confondues et cntrainees avec les ani- 
maux marins et terreftres, ont du occuper les bas-fonds et s'y preci- 
piter dans I'ordre de leur pefanteur fpecifique. Les grands vegetaux 
ont fans doute conltitue les lits inferieurs, ou garni les bords de la mer. 
Les teftacees comme plus legers, ainfi que les pierres roulees et les 
fables ont forme les lits fuperieurs. Ces demiers lits peuvent etre 
contemporains ou pofterieurs, et tenir par cela meme a des epoques 
difFerentes : mais, dans tout etat de caufe, fi les teftacees fe font 
conferves, I'immenfe grofTeur des cetacees, et lafolidite de leur par- 
ties olTeufes devoient aufli contribuer a leur confervation : il feroit 
done tres-aif© dVn rencontrer des indices ; mais fi on en trouve, il& 
font fi rares qu'ils ne peuvent gueres balancer la theorie qui repre- 
fente les vegetaux comme etant les principaux materiaux des 
houilles, cbarbons fofliles, &c. 

Cependant, quoiqu'il n'y ait aucune preuve apparente que les ani- 
maux ayent concouru a la formation des bitumes, il feroit abufifd'en 
rejettec la poflibilite. lis peuvent bien y avoir part dans certains cir- 
conftances : pcut-etre meme auroit-on quelque raifon de regarder 
Tafphalte comme bitvime mixte, fi, pour fe determiner, on s'etayoit 
des argumens tires de fon analyfe ; nous penfons neanmoins que ces 
cas doivent etre tres bornes. 

Mais par quelle puiflance, par quel agent les corps organiques, en- 
fouis par une caufe quelconque, fe trouvent-ils reduits a cet etat de 
durete, de glutinofite ou de liquidite qui cara6lerifent les houilles, 
le malte, le bitume et les huiles de petrole? On ne peut voir ici que 
I'efFet des decompofitions fpontanees et des nouvelles combinaifons 

operce 



on Extraneous FoJJils, 6 1 

operees par les vapeurs minerales et furtoiit par la prefcncc d'unc 
certaine quantite d'eau. Ces debris ainfi renfermes dans Ic fein de la 
terre par Taccumulation fimnltanee ou fucceflive des terres, des 
pierres et des coquillages, auront eprouve des changemens en rai- 
fon compofee de leur maffe, dc la nature de leurs principes et do la 
quantite d*eau dont ils font penetres. A ces caufes il s'en peut-etrc 
joint d'autres qui nous font inconues, mais dont TefFet aura cte plus 
ou moins prompt et dont les refultats font, que ces maticres, ramollics 
par Teau, fubiiTent pendant la revolution des fiecles, et dans Ic filencc 
de la nature, une analyfe comparable a celle qui a lieu dans des vaif- 
faux fermes ; qu'elles s'echauffent par I'effet des decompofitions 
lentes et des nouvelles combinaifons, et fe reduifent en une matiere 
charbonneufe qui oftre fouvent la forme entiere ou, au moins, des in- 
dices marques des corps organifes. Cette fimple carbonification ne 
peut etre vraifemblablement attendue que dans les cas ou la malfcdcs 
matieres combullibles n'eft pas trop confiderablc *. 11 n'eft pas rare 
de rencontrer a quelque diftance des filons de grands vegetaux qui 
confervent leur forme exterieure, parcequ'ils ont ete fepares de la 
mafle : pour I'ordinaire ils font mineralifes. 

On peut raifonnablement conjecturer que les debris dc vegetaux, 
reunis en plus grandes mafTes, et expofes a I'aclion des combinaifons 
particulieres qui donnent la chaleur a certaines eaux thermales, ou 
enfin a Tinfluence des foyers volcaniques voifnis, fubiffcnt une vraie 
diftillation, dont les produits, entraines par I'eau qui s'oppofe a leur 
decompofition, paroilTent a la furfacc de la terre fous I'ctat de 
naphte. 

* La prefence d'une mine de fer divifeeou. fa formation locale acceli^renf fans doute 
cette operation de la Nature. Le Derbyfhire fournit un melange de fer et de manganaifc 
qui prend feu fpontanementlorfqu'on le detrempe avec de I'iiuile de lin. Aux caufes admifcs 
paries phyficiens pour expliquer les inflammations fouterraines on pourroit peut-etre ajoutfrr 
celle desefFets refultants d'un melange jiaturel d'huile de petrole avec une mine defer ana- 
.logue u celle du.Derby{bire. 

Dans 



62 M. TingryV Ohfervat'wns 

Dans d'autres circonftances ces memes huiles detachees des bois 
par leur decompofition fpontanee, s'infiltrent infenfiblement dans 
des couches de fable et d'argille, et donnent origine aux houilles 
feches et aux fchiftes bitumineux. Enfin, dans d'autres circonftances 
encore et qui ne feroient qu'une fuite des precedentes, ces huiles ra- 
ma/Tees dans les fcifiures interieures de la terre y ont pris la confif- 
tence qu'on remarque a la poix minerale. 

Les meditations les plus ferieufes furroriginedescharbons foffile* 
et des matieres qui leur font analogues ou identiques ne peuvent 
gueres difpofer le naturalifte a des opinions contraires a la do6lrine 
qui nous reprefente les vegetaux comme les materiaux des charbons 
fofliles, &c. Lc concours des animaux doit y avoir eu peu d'influ- 
ence, parceque leur difperfion a du s'oppofer a cette operation fe- 
condaire de la Nature ; la condition effentielle pour la bituminifation 
etant que les corps qui y font deftines faffent mafte. Par cette difper- 
fion les corps fe deflechent ou fe mineralifent. En effet les teftacees 
qui rempliffent ou qui conftituent les couches fuperieures qui recou- 
vrent certains filons ne contiennent rien de charbonneux, parceque 
la matiere animale ne faifoit point mafle ; et dans les cas ou les 
grands cetacees auroient contribue a la formation des filons combuf- 
tibles, la prefence de leurs ofTemens, qui devoient s'y conferver audi 
bien que les depouilles des teftacees, feroit un temoignage qui pro- 
nonceroit fur la queftion. 

Nous croyons d'ailleurs que quand il fe prefenteroit quelques faits 
-en faveurde la nouvelle hypothefe, les reflexions particulieres qui en 
feroient la fuite ne pourroient influer que tres foiblement fur Topi- 
nion generale, par cette feule confideration,que les animaux marins 
et terreftres ne peuvent jamais balancer, par leur efFet fuppofe, 
rimmenfe quantite de vegetaux entraines et engloutis par les 
convulfions de la terre. 

Les obfervations que j'ai faites dans les mines de houille de la Ta- 
rentaife ainfi que dans quelques mines de France et de Suifle ne m*ont 

prefente 



on Extraneous FoJJih, 63 

prefente aucun fait coincidant avec Thypothefe Francoife* : dans 
toutes ces mines j'ai appcr9U des depouilles de teftacees, comme 
cames, peignes, moules, gryphites, huitres, terebratules, &c. renfcr- 
mees dans les couches fuperieures des filons et meme dans le corps 
de lamontagne; mais je n'y ai vu aucune de ces depouilles animales 
ayant des indices de bituminifation. Les debris de vegetaux font 
plus ou- moins fenfibles dans la mafTe meme du charbon. 

Si dans ces recherches particulieres il ne s'efl prefente que 
quelques fragmens appartenant a la clafle des vegetaux, celles que je 
viens de faire dans de nouveaux filons ouverts depuis peu en Savoyc 
ont ete plus heureufes. Les plantes enfouis y font carbonifiees fans 
avoir rien perdu de leur forme organique. Deplus, les cchantillons 
que j'en ai tires confirment une opinion qu'on doit a la fagacite du cc- 
lebre Bernard de Juflieu, relativement aux empreintes vege'tales et 
aux infe6tes qu'on trouve dans certaines mines d'Europe ; c'eft que 
leurs analogues appartiennent a Tlnde et a TAmerique. 

Ces filons de houille ont ete apper9us un peu au-deffus de Ta- 
ninge, bourg de la province de Faucigni en Savoye. lis font ouverts 
fur les flancs d'un torrent qui defcend des montagnes d'Abondance, 
et qui, apres avoir traverfe le bourg, verfe fes eaux dans le GifFre. 
Leur elevation au-deffus du lac de Geneve eft de 168 toifes, fuivant 
les mefures prifes par M. le Prof. Piglet. C'eft dans les deblais du 
chapeau des filons que j*ai trouve les empreintes carbonifiees dont je 
donne ici la defcription. J'en enverrai des cchantillons a la pre- 
miere occafion. 

* Si la fubftance animale avoit pu influer d'une maniere fenfible fur la formation des 
charbons foffiles, c'eft dans ces maffes enormes de coquillages alteres oudetruits qui confti- 
tuent les montagnes de St. Pierre, pres de Maftricht, ainfi que dans les immenfes fafunieres 
dela France que nous en devrions chercher les preuves les moins equivoques, Cependanc 
il ne s'y trouve pas de charbon foilile ; et s'il s'en rencontre, on y reconnoit bientotles traces 
de Torganifation vegetale. 



64 M. Tingry'j Obfervaiions 

La montagne que recele ces filons eft du genre des calcaires ; mais 
elle renferme des melanges de pierres que les bornes de ces obferva- 
tions ne permettentpas de decrire, et que le celebre lithologifte Gene- 
vois mettra fans doute a la fuite de fes precieufes obfervations fur les 
parties compofantes de nos montagnes. 

1. Tron9on d'un grand rofeau carbonifie, de 4 pouces de dia- 
mctre et dont les fillons interieurs font imprimes dans le noyau 
pierreux. On y remarque quatre articulations, dont les lames ren- 
trantes, egalement carbonifiees, fe prolongent affez avant dans Tinte- 
rieur du noyau et femble le divifer en autant de parties. Ce noyauj 
qui eft comprim^ par I'efFet de la pefanteur des couches fuperieuresj 
eft un melange d'argille durcie, de fable et de mica blanc. 

2. Une portion d*une large feuille carbonifiee appartenant, fans 
doute, a I'efpcce de rofeau decrit ci-defTus, et dont les nervures font 
fortement exprimees. Cette feuille, dont je crois pouvoir determiner 
toute la largeur, a raifon de la depreftion des deux bords, a fix pouces 
de diamctre. Sa longueur eft indeterminee, le morceau que je pof- 
fede n'ayant qu'un pied de longueur fans indiquer cette decroiflance 
qui conduit a Vapex. La bafe de la pierre eft de la meme efpece que 
la precedente, et prefente aftcz le caradtere de celles que le celebre 
Kirwan defigne fous le nom de Kilia, 

3. Des lames d'un fchifte noir mele de calcaire, furlefqucUes on 
voit de larges feuilles de rofeaux et d'autres feuilles de la meme fa- 
mille, mais plusetroites ; des varietes de fougeres; des portions ine- 
gales de longs pedicules. Une partie de ces lames n'offre que des em- 
preintes ordinaires, tandis qued'autres echantillons les prefentent en- 
tierement carbonifiees et entieres. On y diftingue auffi Vequ'ifetuin et 
une efpece de char a, 

4. D'autres empreintes de feuilles de rofeaux egalement carbonifiees 
et mineralifees par des pyrites martiales en lames fuperficielles fur 
une gangue de gres fchiftcux. 

5. D'autres 



en Extraneous FoJJils. 65 

5. D'autres feuillets fchifteux noirs, avec quclques unes des em- 
,preintes precedentes confondues avec des foUioles en apparence reni- 
formes et les pedicules defignes (N" 3.) Quelquefois runion de ces 
pedicules eft tellement difpofee a I'egard de ces follioles qu'on feroit 
tente de les regarder comme leur appartenant. 

La premiere idee que prefente I'afpe^t de ces foUioles, c'cft 
qu'elles ont ete fournies par VOfmunda regalis ; mais la nervure de 
fes feuilles qui eft plus apparente que dans nos fchiftes, et qui, outre 
cela, fe termine par un bord ferre qu'on ne voit pas dans nos em- 
preintes, augmentoit nos incertitudes fur leur veritable efpece. Un feul 
morceau qui m'eft tombe fous la main, et qui montre huit adix folli- 
oles oppofees et attachees a leur pedicule commun, nous a decouvert 
V Afplenlum nodofum.frond'ibus plnnatis, p'lnnis oppo/itis, lanceolatis^ integerri- 
mis^ de Linne. C'eft la FUix latifolia nodofa de Plumier, Plantcs d'Ainc- 
rique, p. 4. tab. 6. 

Gette plante eft abfolument etrangere a notre climat, et elle ne 
croit que dans I'Amerique Meridionale. 11 en eft de meme de 
quelques fougeres et de nos feuilles de grands rofeaux, dont on ne 
trouve point les analogues dans les endroits ou on les decouvre. 

6. Je peux joindre a la defcription de ces echantillons celle d'un 
morceau deboispetrifie quej'ai ramaflc dans les environs d'Annecy, 
petite ville de Savoye. La matiere lapidifique eft de nature quart- 
zeufe ; et elle eft tellement diftribuee que la contexture du bois n'cft 
nuUement alteree dans fa forme. Ce morceau a cela d'intereilant 
qu'une partie eft convertie en vrai charbon foflile tres-noir, luifant, 
et ayant en un mot tous les cara61:eres qui le fpecifient. Ge charbon, 
divife par baguettes qui fuivent la direction des fils du bois, eft telle- 
ment contigu a la mafle lapidifiee, que le paflage du charbon a la 
pierre eft marque par des nuances tres-fenfibles dans fa durete et dans 
fa Gouleur, qui fe confondent enfin avec celles de la pierre. A I'une 
des extremites du morceau on obferve une belle criftallifation de 
fpath pefant en lames rhomboidales aftez tranfparentes. 

K Quelqu'ifolees 



66 M, TingryV Obfervations on Extraneous Fqffils, 

Quelqu'ifolees que paroiflent ces obfervations, nous avons nean- 
moins efpere qu'elles pouvoient etre confignees dans le depot des 
materiaux qui peuvent feuls prononcer fur les cataftrophes qui ont 
tourmentc notre globe, et fur la nature des fubftances qui femblent 
concourir le plus a la formation des charbons fofliles, des bitumes, 
petroles, &c. 

Geneve, le 26 Avril 1788. 



?^'wl- 



( 67 ) 



III. Ohfervations on the Phalana Bombyx Lubricipeda of Linneus, and 
fome other Moths allied to it. By T'homas Marfiam^ Efq. Secretary to 
the Linnean Society, 

Read Augujl 5, 1788. 

WITH a view to promote the interefls of that fcience which 
we profefs to cultivate, I take the hberty of offering to the 
confideratlon of the Linnean Society a few remarks, made with a 
defire of correcSting an error into which the celebrated Linneus has 
fallen in defcribing his Phalaena Bombyx Lubricipeda; which, 
although a very common infe6l, has been by him confounded with 
three other fpecies ; an error in which he has been followed by Fa- 
briciu§ and others. But before we enter on this fubjetfl, I cannot 
help exprefling a wifh, that entomology were more fludied as a 
fcience ; from a convi6lion that many interefling obfervations and 
difcoveries have frequently been made, which are concealed, or 
totally lofb, for want of a proper mode of communicating them to 
the public. Few of the Englifh names of infects being generally 
known, and many of them very local indeed, fcarcely any two ob- 
fervers, who confine themfelves to thefe names, can always under- 
ftand each other. If the ftudy of infects be of any utility, clearnefs 
and precifion in its purfuit are well worthy our attention. To enu- 
merate the ufes of this ftudy, would be only to repeat what has been 
often faid before. Yet if the appearance of an harmlefs caterpillar 

K 2 in 



68 Mr. Mar SHAM* J Ohfervatlom 

in greater numbers than ufual could caufe fo ferious an alarm to the 
inhabitants of London and its environs, as happened in the year 
1782, when the churchwardens and overfeers of the neighbouring 
villages, after ordering rewards for collecting thefe caterpillars, at- 
tended to fee them burnt by bufhels; furely much praife was due to 
the author of that curious and well-timed ElTay on the Brown-tail 
Moth, in which, by a circumftantial and faithful hiflory of the little 
innocent animal, he reftored tranquillity to a terrified multitude. 

It is from fuch accurate and critical, inveftigations of the nature 
and oeconomy of thefe lower orders of animals, and a mutual com^ 
munication of our difcoveries, that wt muft expe6l profit. For al- 
though the labours of an individual taken feparately may afford 
little; yet when colleded, compared, and digefled, they may very 
much enrich the general ftock of knowledge. Could we with certainty 
attain a true hiftory of the different dates of each particular infe6l, 
w^e might be enabled to form a complete fyftem, and alfo a method of 
claffification more natural, eafy, and lefs liable to error and confufion 
than thofe now in ufe; but this, if ever accomplifhed, muft be a 
work of time. In the mean while let us try how much is to be 
gained from a careful attention to fpecific diftin6lions. It is abfo- 
lutely neceifary to confider the different ftates of the infeft, becaufe 
many fpecies that appear hmilar in their larvae are totally different 
in their perfe6l ftates, and vice verfa. Few people difcover any 
difference between the maggot of a nut and that of an apple; and 
yet there are fcarce any two infects more unlike when arrived at 
perfection: the one a beautiful little moth, and the other a remark- 
able beetle of the genus Curculio. They are however eafily diflin- 
guitlied, even in their firft ftate, by an attentive obferver. An ento- 
mologifl fhould always endeavour to be acquainted with his infeCl 
in all its changes, as a good botanift always defires to know his plant 
in every ftage of its growth. Varieties in the fame fpecies of infe6t 

are 



on the Phal^na Bombyx Lubricipeda ofL'mneus^ ^c, 69 

are certainly not fo numerous as many have conje(5lurecl ; for though 
Nature frequently iports in this way in the Lepidoptera Glafs, where 
w^e fee different markings and fliadcs of colour in the fame fpecies, 
as in Phal. Geom. Prunaria, Defoharia, &c.; yet an accurate eye will 
foon diftinguifli fome conftant chara<?teri{lic mark which never 
fails to run through and unite them: for example, the long comma- 
like mark in the firfh inftance, and the roundifli dark fpot in the 
fecond; neither of which ever vary. The diftin6tion of fex is indeed 
varioufly marked, and requires peculiar attention. Some larvae pro- 
duce winged males and apterous females, which are fo totally different 
in their appearance, that it would be impoffible to determine them 
to be the fame fpecies, if we were not acquainted with their hiftory. 
Some females again have fmall, or as it were only rudiments of, 
wings; and others differ from the males (o much in colour as not to ap- 
pear fimilar. In fome claffes the diftinftion is ftrongly marked by the 
antennse; in others one fex is furnillied with horns, of which the 
other is deflitute. So that a confiderable degree of attention is requi- 
fite before we attempt to determine; and therefore thofe entomologiffcs 
are moft to be depended upon, who are at the pains to trace their in- 
fe6l through its different changes from the egg to its perfe6l fbate; 
thus acquiring truth from the fountain head. And to fuch I would 
particularly recommend a fcientific arrangement, that their obfer- 
vations may be more diffufed, and become generally ufeful. In the 
courfe of my own obfervation, I have never feen moths bred from 
the fame eggs fo different as to be miftaken for diftin6l fpecies, ex- 
cept in the before-mentioned cafes, where the females were apterous, 
or differed from the males in the colour of their wings. In the latter 
inftance, indeed, the markings are generally fimilar in form, and only 
differ in {hade and colour. If we refle6l on the wonderful labours of 
the great Linneus, and the immenfe numbers of objects which he has 
arranged and defcribed, comprehending the three kingdoms of Nature, 

5 we 



yo Mr. MarshamV Obfervai'wns 

we fliall not be furprifed that he has fometimes erred : ^' humanum efi 
err are.''' But our aftonifhment will be increafed when we carefully 
examine for ourfelves, and obferve how feldom he did fo. For we 
find, that feveral errors that have been imputed to him arife from 
the fjmilarity of many fpecies to each other, and our not having feen 
the true fpecies of Linneus. The truth of this obfervation has been 
proved in many inftances, fmce the arrival of his valuable cabinet 
in this country. Infe<5ls of various fpecies are fo nearly conne61:ed, 
that it is, as I have before obferved, impoffible to difcriminate them 
without attending to their different flates : and this could never be 
expeded from a man who was defcribing all the animals on the 
habitable globe ; as in many cafes he was obliged to defcribe from 
bad fpecimens, and often to depend on the reprefentations of others. 
Many authors, fearful of multiplying fpecies, appear to have fallen 
into the contrary extreme; and Linneus himfelf has either confidered 
different Phalocnae in many inftances as the fame, or he was a ftran- 
ger to many of the moft common in this country. I fhall however 
at prefent confine myfelf to his Phal. Bom. Lubricipeda and Men- 
dica, and hope that others will endeavour to make fimilar remarks 
on thofe fpecies that appear to be erroncoufly united. To render 
the matter as clear as poffible, I have fubjoined a drawing of four 
different Phalaenae, that appear to have much affinity, in their three 
ftates, and have added a fpecific defcription of each, together with 
the fynonyms of various authors; by which it will appear how much 
they have been mifquoted and mifapplied. 

PHAL^NA BOMBYX. 
E R M I N E A . ^ab. i.f, I. Cream Ermine. 
B. Alls albis pun6lis nigris fparfis, abdomine quinquefariam nigro 
punclato. 
Linn, Syjl, Nat, 829. 69. lubricipeda. Faun, Suec. 1138. fccm. 

Fab. 



on the Phalana Bomhyx "Lubrklpeda of Lmneus^ ^c, 7 1 

Fah, Syji, Ent, 576. 68. Sp. Inf. 190. 93. 

Gad. Inf. vol, I. tab. 2^. fg, 38. Lfi. Gxd. 96. Rai. Inf jig. 195. 

n. 40. Albin. Inf. ^^-f '^^ g — k. JVllkes 20. /. 3 — 5. 
DeGeer. Inf. i. t. ii.f. S. Roef Inf 2. t.^6, Efpcr. torn, 3. tab. 66. 

jig, 6 — 10 Menthaftri. Harris Aur. pi, 38. g — b. Ernji, 

Pap, d'Europe, pL 158. n. 204. 

Habitat in arboribuspomiferis, urtica, atriplici, quercu. 
Expanfio alarum i unc. 6 lin. 
Defcrip, Femora, praefertim antica, lanugine ferruginea veftita; 
Corpus album; Al<ie adfperfse puii<Slis nigris plurimis in fupcriorum 
pagina fuperiore; Abdomen luteum quintuplici macularum nigra- 
rum ordine, quorum unus dorfalis, duo utrinque laterales — Ano 
albo quo certo certius, a Ph. lubricipeda difFert. 



LuBRiciPEDA. I'ab. i,f, 2, Cream Dot Stripe. 

B. Alis lutefcentibus pundlis nigris plerumque ordine obliquc-tranf- 

verfo pofitis. 
Linn. Syfi, Nat, 829. 6^. (2. Faun, Suec. 1138. mas. Fab, Sy/l. Ent, 

576. 68. Sp, Inf, 190. g^. 
Gced. Inf, vol, i. 38. Li/i, Goed, i^^, Rai, Inf, 196. n. 155. 
MerianEur. i. /. 46./. ^$* Alb. Inf, 24./. '^^. a — d. Frifch, Inf 3. /. 8. 

Ammiral. t. 6. 
DeGeer, Inf, i, t, 11, f, j, Roef Inf 2, t. 47. IFilJkes 20. /. 3. — 6. 

Efper, vol, 3. tab, 66, fg, i — 5. 
Harris Aur, pi. \6. h — 1. Ernf, Pap, d' Eur. pi. 157. «. 203. 

Expaniio alarum i unc. 6 lin. 
Defcrip, Variat colore alarum albido et lutefcente. Maxime affinis 
Ermineae, a qua difFert gundlis plerifque ferie obliqua pofitis ; 

quod 



^2 Mr. MARSHAM'i Obfervattons 

quod in ilia omnino defideratur — Anus variat pro re nata 
flavefcentior; neque unquam albus. 

Mendica. ^ab, \,f. 5. Spotted Mujlin, 
B. Alis mafculis fufcis obfcuris. "1 ^^^.j-^^^ nigro-punaato. 

foemineis nivcis pellucidis. j 

Linn. Syji, Nat. 822. 47. Faun. Suec, TI27. mas. Pet. Ga%. 

44. fg* 8. foem. 
Rai, Inf. 196. j^n. 97. 6. foem. Reaum. Inf. 2. /. I.^. I — 9. 
Efper. vol. 3. tab. ^.^.jig. i — 9. Harris Aur.pl. 35. m. 



^ r \ r Mas, I imc. i lin. 

Expanlio alarum \ 

L Foem. i unc. 5 Im. 



Defcrip, Mas. Alas anticae fufcae, macula albida, media, obfoleta, 
et pundlis circiter 9 nigris, fparfis — poflicae concolores pundlis 
4 feu 5 nigris marginem verfus. 

Foemina. Alae omnes pellucidae, fuperiores pun6lis circiter 9 nigris, 
fparfis; inferiores circiter 7, marginalibus. 

In utraque antennas nigrse, femora lutea. 

PAPYRATIA. Tab. i.f. 4. PFater Ermine. 

B. Alis niveis, pundlis ad apicem nigris, abdomine quinquefariam 
nigro pun6lato. 

Albin. Inf. 11. f. 30, e — h. 

- . ..- \ - 1. ¦ 
Expanfio alarum i unc. 6 lin. 

Defcrip. Maxime affinis Ph. Ermineae, at alas pun6lis folummodo 

ad apicem circiter fex nigris ; fciiicet quatuor confertis in ipfo aplce, 

longitudinaliter pofitis, et duobus intra haec tranfverfim du<5tis, 

diftantibus. Caput, thorax et abdomen ut in Ph. Erminea. 

Larva habitat in plantis aquaticis. 

Fig. I. 



on the Phalcena Bombyx Luhrkipeda ofL'mmus^ ^c. 73 

Fig. T. to which I have given the name of Erminea, appears to be 
the moth which Linneus delcribes in the Syfl. Nat. as Lubrici- 
peda, and to that moth is the name affixed in his cabinet. \\\ the 
Fauna Suecica the particular defcription is, '* Mas ahs flavefccntibus 
ordine obhque tranfverfo punclorum nigrorum," which is an exa6l 
defcription of fig. 1. to which I have retained the name of Lubrici- 
peda ; not only becaufe that name, taken from the motion of the 
caterpillar, agrees better with this fpecies than the other, but becaufe 
every author who has figured it fince Linneus has conftantly fo ap- 
plied it, though they have given different names to fig. i. Notwith- 
ftanding Linneus has united thefe two fpecies of Phala:na, and men- 
tioned them as male and female of each other, it is butjufticc toob- 
ferve, that it appears done contrary to his own opinion ; for, in quoting 
the fynonyms of Wilkes and Rcefel, he makes one a variety at leaft, 
with his ufual mark /3, and then adds, ** Varietatem /3 non diftinc- 
tam effe fpeciem docuit De Geer." That accurate author has written 
a long paper upon the fubjed of thefe moths, in which he has endea- 
voured to prove that thefe two fpecies are the fame. He however 
defcribes but one kind of caterpillar, from which he had males yellow, 
and females white. This is in fome refpefts the fa6l; for the female 
of fig. 2. is much lighter in colour than the male, and fometimes 
approaches to white. He refers to Reaumur to prove this afTertion: 
but I am clearly convinced, that in the fecond memoir of the fecond 
volume of that illuftrious author, it is the Mendica of Linneus which 
is defcribed; and that the others are not mentioned. For with that 
moth his defcription perfectly coincides ; the -female of which has 
fome refemblance to that of Erminea, as may be feen in fig. 3. ; but 
will be found totally diftincf, not only on account of the colour of 
its male, which, as Reaumur obfers^es, is the " colour of a rat," but 
alfo from the femi-tranfparency of the wings of the female, from 
whence Engliih colle6tors have named it th.tfpoited mujlin; 

L Linneus 



74 Mr. Marsh AM V Obfer'uailons 

Linneus himfelf appears to have been unacquainted with the 
female Mendica; and the fpecimen of the male in his cabinet 
being a bad one, with the black fpots obliterated, he del'cribes it, 
cinerea tota, femoribus luteis. This however is not the cafe; for 
the male is fpotted like the female, as may be feen in the drawing, 
fig. 3, 6. There is indeed a bad fpecimen of the female of this 
moth in his cabinet; but it is placed indifcriminately with Lubri- 
cipcda and Erminea. I have endeavoured to give to each the 
fynonyms quoted by Linneus; to which I have added many that 
have been publifhed fmce his work was printed, omitting feveral 
that appeared only copies of Linneus. Bat even to them I am 
under fome obligation, as they have referred me to fynonyms 
which others had overlooked. As the fimilarity of the colour in 
the bodies of the two firft fpecies appears to have been the occa- 
fion of their having been placed together, I have added another 
(vide fig. 4.), and named it Papyratia, exadly agreeing with them 
in that particular, although perfe6lly diftincSl, as the larva and 
mode of living teftify. This moth is more rare than either of the 
others, and I find but one figure of it, which is in Albin, and 
well executed. As almofl: every author who has given figures of 
the two firft infe(5ls in their different ftates, makes them diftin6l 
fpecies, it may with fome propriety be alked, where is the ne- 
ceflity of adducing further proof on the fubje6l? The neceffity will 
appear evident, when we confider, that as the Syftema Naturas 
and Fauna Suecica of Linneus, and Syft. Ent, of Fabricius, the 
moft valuable and ufeful fcientific books, agree in uniting them, 
and quote fuch refpe6table authority as Reaumur and De Geer; 
and as I am ignorant of any fpecific defcriptions having been 
given, it appears abfolutely neceflary for the young entomologift 
to have them feparated and clearly diftinguiihed; and the more fo, 
as Ernft, in his admirable work, Papillons d'Europe^ after having 
5 taken 



r- 





Q.J^^r/:.,^a rd. ('^ 



'^/u/^r^z 







? ^.f 



y/a/a^/^f/r /C^. r /¦&/////t'rr . 



3 




L/nnTrTns'. I. f-a7\I. p. '^S . 



t 





^Jy^a/^r//^/ . Ai..^^i^/Y^v/UY/^/ . 




^k 






on the Phalana Bombyx huhrkipcda ofLinneuSj ^c, 75 

taken great pains to prove them difl:In(5l fpecies, and combating 
the obje6lions of others, adds, that in the midft of the different 
teftimonies which appear fo contradi6lory, he wiihes not to decide 
the queftion, but invites other naturaHfts to raife them from thp 
egg, and give the refult of their obfervations. 



L 2 IV. Dcfcrlp- 



{ 76 ) 



IV. Defcr'ipttond of four Species of Cypripedium^ by Richard Anthony 
Sa/i/buty, Efq, F, R. S, Fellow of the Linnean Society » 

Read Odfober 7, 1788. 



CYPRIPEDIORUM aliquorum icones necnon defcriptiones 
Societati Linneanas oblaturus, charadlerem elTentialem hujus 
generis minime labio inferiori corollse calceiformi, potius autem 
ftru6lura genitalium conflare, quae in omnibus orchideis diftin- 
guendis maxime valent, praemittere vellem. 

CYPRIPEDIUM CALGEOLUS. t. 2. f. i. 

Cypripedium Calceolus. Linn, Sp. PL p. 1340. Calceolus, &c. 
HalL Hiji, Helv. v. 1, n, 1300. /. 42. Calceolus marianus. Dod, 
Pempt,p, 180./. I, 2. 

Corolla labio fuperiore ovali concavo fubtus caring late canalicu- 
lata, inferiore petalis breviore comprefTo. • 

Sponte nafcentem in Oftro-Bothnia fylvis abunde legit C. Linne — 
prope Bern declivibus montium umbrofis legit A. Haller — in Monte 
Saleve legit J. Ray — in Pedemontiiijlyh legit C. AUioni. 

Floret fine Tvlaii, Junio. 

Planta 8-10 pollicaris. Radix fufca, horizontalis, tuberofa — Fibrae 
crafTae, fafciculatas — carnofa, perennis. Caulis viridis, ereiSlus, fim- 
plex, teres, articulatus, hirto-pubefcens, folidus, herbaceus, mar- 

cefcens. 



Mr. Salisburv'j Defcrlptions, Cfr. 77 

cefcens. Folia 5 vel 6, viridia, alterna, feflllia, bafi amplcxicaiilia, 
patenti-recurva, lanccolata, integerrima, obtufe acuminuiata — Nervi 
parallel!, longitudinales, fupra deprefli — hirto-pubefcentia prxcipue 
fubtus, paululum undulata, hcrbacca, inarccfccntia. Flores nu- 
tantes, folitarii, rarius duo. PeduncuJus foliis brevior, e caule 
continuatus, ftrudtura omnino fimilis. Bra^lea folitaiia fub gcrmine, 
ftrnflura foliorum fed minor, magifque ovato-lanceolata. Gcrmen 
viride, incuiTulum, angufte pyriforme, 6-angulum, hirto-pubefccns. 
Petala faturate fufca : fupremum ere6tum, infimum xqualc, depen- 
dens; ovato-lanccolata : lateralia multo anguftiora, parum longiora, 
patenti-deflexa-, lineari-attcnuata, bafi intus barbata : intcgcrrima, 
obtufa, tenuifTime hirto-pubefcentia pra^lertim cxtns, tortuofa — 
Labium fuperius flavum maculis fulcis, ultra lobos laterales ftyli 
infertum, ellipticum, integerrimum, obtufum, utrinque la[:vc, fupra 
concavum, fubtus carina late canaliculate. Labium inferius fiavum, 
petalis brevius, calceiformc, comprefTum, ore fuborbiculare, cxtus 
laive, intus bafi barbatum lineis macularum fufcarum. Stylus 
flavus, la:vis — Lobi ; laterales apice incurvuli, angufle cuneiformes, 
obtufi ; medius oblongus, bafi latior, medio anguftatus, obtufus. 
Antherae flavx, paulo infra apicem loborum quibus multo latiorcs, 
orbiculares, biloculares. Pollen flavum. Stigma pallide flavum, 
ball triangulo umbilicatum, minute papillofum. 

a Labium fuperius. d Styli lobus terminalis. 

h inferius. e Antherae. 

^ c Styli lobi laterales. 

lifdem literis in omnibus tabulis notantur eaedem partes. 

CYPRIPEDIUM PARVIFLORUM. t. 2. f. 2. 

Helleborine Calceolus di6la, mariana, caule foliofo, fiore Juteo 

minore. Plukn, Mantijf. p. loi. t, 418./ 2. pejima. 

Corolla 



78 Mr. Salisbury'^ Defcrlptlom of 

Corolla labio fuperiore fagittGeformi bafi deflexo fubtus carina 
angufte canaliculata, inferiore petalis breviore compreflb. 

Spoil te nafcentem in Virginia legit H. Marlliall. 

Floret fine Maii. 
Petala fordide vinidia lineis macularum ferruginearum : fnpre- 
mum ereclum ; infimum paulo brevius, dependens ; ovato-lanceo- 
lata: lateralia multo anguftiora, i-4ta parte longiora, patenti- 
deflexa, lineari-attenuata, bafi intus barbata : integerrima, obtufa, 
tenuifiime hirto-pubefcentia pr^efertim extus, tortuofa — Labium 
fuperius flavum maculis fufcis lobos laterales ftyli obducens bafi 
deflexum, late fagittaeforme, integerrimum, obtufumy utrinque laeve, 
fupraverfus apicem concavum, fubtus carina angufte canaliculata — • 
Labium inferius flavum maculis fufcis circa apicem, petalis brevius, 
calceiforme, comprefTum, ore fuborbiculare, extus laeve, intus bafi 
barbatum. Stylus flavus — Lobi; laterales apice ipfo levifilme incur- 
vuli, angufte cuneiformes, obtufi ; medius femi-ellipticus, obtufus — 
laevis. Antherx flavae, infra apicem loborum quibus multo la- 
tiores, orbiculares, biloculares. Pollen flavum. Stigma flavum, bafi 
triangulo umbilicatum, minute papillofum. 

Herba gaudet praecedentis, fed Folia remotiora et ovalia. 

CYPRIPEDIUM SPECTABILE* /s- f. j. 

Helleborine flore majore purpureo, &c. Mdrif. Hiji. v. 3. p. 488. 
y^ 12. /. 11./. 17. pejjima. Helleborine Calceolus di61:a, mariana, 
flore gemello candido, venis purpureis ftriato. Plukn. Maniijf.p. loi. 
/. 418. /. 3. peJJlma, 

Corolla labio fuperiore ovali bafi retufo concavo fubtus carina 
obtufa, inferiore petalis longiore groflTo. 

Sponte nafcentem in Penfyhania fylvis legit L Bartram. 
Floret fine Maii, Junio. 

* C. album. Alton HorU Kew. V. 3. 303. 

Planta 



four Species of Cypnpedium. 70 

Planta pedalis, vel plus. Radix congenerum. Caulis pallidc 
viridis, erectus, fimplex, teres, articulatus, hirfutus, folidus, hcrba- 
ceus, marcercens. Folia 6 vel 7, pallide viridia, aiterna, fefiHia, bafi 
amplexicaulia, patenti-recurva, ovali-lanceolata, integerrima, obtufc 
acuminulata — Nervi paralleli, longitudinales, fupra depicffi — hir- 
futa prxi'eitim fubtus, paululum undulata, herbacea, maicefcentia. 
Flores, Bra6tea, Pedunculus, Germenq-ae ut in Cypripedio Calceolo. 
Petala alba : fupremum ere6tuiii ; infimum paulo brcvius, dcpen- 
dens ; ovalia: lateralia longitudine fupremi, multo anguftiora, lineari- 
lanceolata, bafi intus barbata : integerrima, obtufa, hirto-pubci- 
centia praefertim extus, plana — Labium fuperius album maculis 
rubris, lobos laterales obducens, ovale, bafi retulum, intcgerrimum 
obtufum, utrinque laeve, fupra concaviufculum, fubtus carina obtufa 
-—Labium inferius pallide rofeum vittis faturatioribus, petalis longlij, 
groffe calceiforme, ore tranfvcrfe ovale, extus lacve, intus bafi bar- 
batum lineis macularum rubrarum. Stylus albus — Lobi; laterales 
recurvi, falcati, obtufi ; mcdius fuborbicularis, obtufiffimus, laevis. 
Antherae dilute flavaE, ovales, vix infra apicem loborum quibus 
parum latiores. Pollen flavum. Stigma dilute flavum, bafi trian- 
gulo umbilicatum, minute papillofum. 

CYPRIPEDIUM HUMILE* t. 3. f. 4. 

Calceolus flore maximo rubente, &c. Catef. H'lfl, Car. j^ppejid, p. 3. 
/. 3. medlocrh. Helleborine Calceolus di6la, mariana, foliis binis 
e radice ex adverfo prodeuntibus, &c. Pltikn, Mantijf. p, loi. /. 418. 
/. i.pejjlma. 

Corolla labio fuperiore rhomboideo acuminato lateribus deflexo fub- 
tus carina anguftiflima obtufa, inferiore petalis longiore antice fiflb. 
Sponte nafcentem in Novd^Scotia kgit A, Menzies. 
Floret fine Maii, Junio. 

* C. acaule. Jiton Hort. Kew. V. 3. 303. 

Planta 



8o Mr. Salisbury^ Defcnptions, &c, 

Planta 6-8 pollicaris. Radix congenerum. Folia duo, viridia, 
radicalia, oppofita, patentia, lanceolala, integerrima, obtufa — Nervi 
paralleli, longitudinales, fupra deprefli — utrinque hirto-pubefcentia, 
planiufcula herbacea, marcefcentia. Flores iiutantes, folitarii. Pe- 
dunculus viridis, foliis faepe longior, ere6lus, fimplex, teres, hirto- 
pubefcens, folidus, herbaceus, marcefcens. Bradea folitaria fub 
germine, flru6lura foliorum fed longe minor et ovato-lanceolata. 
Germen viride, breve incurvum, obfolete pyriforme 6-anguIum, 
hirto-pnbefcens. Petala palHde fufca : fnpremum ere6lum ; infi- 
mum asquale, dependens ; ovato-lanceolata : lateralia anguftiora 
pauloque longiora, patenti-deflexa, lineari-attenuata, latere inferiore 
bafi paululum auriculata, inferne intus barbata : integerrima, obtufa, 
utrinque hirto-pubefcentia, tortuofa — Labium fuperius pallide fuf- 
cum, ultra lobos laterales ftyli infertum, lateribus deflexum, verfus 
apicem paululum incurvum, rhomboideum, acuminatum, utrinque 
hirto-pubefcenSjfubtus carina anguftiflima obtufa — Labium inferius 
purpureum vittis faturatioribus, petalis longis ; bafi redte deflexum, 
intus barbatum ; dein exporre6lum, groffe calceiforme, ore antice 
fifTum, utrinque hirto-pubefcens. Stylus flavus — Lobi ; laterales 
apice ipfo Iceviffime incurvuli, angufte cuneiformes, obtufi ; medius 
late cuneiformis bafi anguftiore, obtufus — hirto-pubefcens. Antherx 
flavas, lobis multo latiores, orbiculares, 2-loculares. Pollen flavum. 
Stigma dilute flavum, bafi longe attenuatum, triangulo umbilicatum, 
papillofum. 



Linn . T/rms. /. tctt. ^.f. 'fO. 






c\\. Wf' 



.//.. 



Lnni.Tnnis. /./ft/-, .i . ^. <VO. 




^_yfUteA^?T.,'t^Me ^fy • 



( 8' ) 



V. Defcrlptions of ten Specie^ of Lichen co Heeled in the South of Europt» 
By James Edward Smith,, M,D, F^R,S. Prefdent of the Linnean 
Society. 

Read November 4, 1788. 

I. Lichen exanthematicus. /. 4./ I. 

JL/» Leprofus cinereus, fcutellis minutiffimis carneis immerfis in 
cruflac foveolis albis. Confer Lichenem 2077, 2078, HalL Hiji, 

Habitat in rupibus calcareis Gallise auftralis, non longe ab 
Avenione. 

Crufta tenuifTima, vix palpabilis, cinerea, adfperfa pun6lis 
albis, e foveolis parvis, integumento albo, rugofo, claufis, quo 
poftea e centro fe difpandente, fcutella prodit exigua, carnea, 
proprio margine concolori inflru6la, in centro foveolae re- 
condita. His fcutellis xtate diflilientibus, foveolae reftant 
albae, vacu^E, et quafi ipfo lapide excavatGe, ut in h. iinmerjo 
Weberi. 

2. L. gypfaceus. /. df.f 2. 

L. cruftaceus lobatus; interne albus ; fuperficie virenti, fcutellis 
difformibus flavefcentibus. 

L. fragilis. Scop. Cam. No. 1402, ut ex defcriptione patet, 
exclufo fynonymo Seguieri. 

L. pulmonarius, faxatilis, farinaceus, major, foliis craffis fubro- 
tundis, ecinereo virefcentibus, inferne albis, receptacu lis florum 
fubrufis, Mich. Nov. Gen. Plant. 94, /. 51. ord. 30./ i. 

M Habitat 



8/2 Dr. SMiTH*i Defcripi'wns 

Habitat in rupibus Monfpelii & Genu^e. 

Crufta craffilTima, gypfacea, lobata, intus margineque albif- 
fiina, fupra viridis. Scutellse numerofae, magnitudine & figura 
valde variantes, tcflaceo fiavefcentes, actate rimofa^. Affinis ^ 
L» lenUgerOy fed fpecie diftin6lus. 

^ 3. L. tumidulus. /. 4. y*. 3. 

L. cruftaceus albus lobatus : lobis deflexis tumidis, tuberculis atris 
difFormibus. 

Habitat in fifiuris rupium Galliae auftralis. 

Crufta alba, lobata; lobi rotiindati, valde defiexi, ut far^li vel 
inflati apparent, fupra minute telTellato-rimofi. Tubercula in 
interftitiis loborum, atra, irregularia. 

4. L. faxifragus. /. 4.yi 4. 

L. cruftaceus lobatus longifTime radicatus caefius, tuberculis rubris. 
Habitat in fiffuris rupium Monfpelii. 

Radices alba:^, ramofae, in fiffuras rupium longifTime de- 
fcendunt. Crufta lobata, fubfoliacea, crafliufcula, ca^fii vel 
glauci colons. Tubercula magnitudine feminis Sinapios, rubra. 

5. L. chryfoleucus. i, ^.f, 5. 

L. imbricatus, foliolis lobatis obtufis : fupra pallide fulphureis ; 
fubtus atro-viridibus, fcutellis aureis. 

Habitat in montis Cenifii rupibus. 

Similis L. crajfo Hudfoni Fl. An. fed tenerior, magifque foli- 
aceus, neque fubtus albus. Singularis nempe eft color atro 
virens paginis inferioris foliolorum, fme ulla hirfutie vel pu- 
befcentia. Scutellae numerofse, aureae, margine foliis concolori, 
qui poftea evanefcit, & inde fcutellse tubercula evadunt. 

< 6. L. 



of ten Species of Lichen, 83 

6. L. tiliaceus. 

L. imbricatus, foliolis finuatis Ixvibus cinereo albidis, fcutellis 
badiis margine albido Iscvi *. 

L. tiliaceus. Hoffman Fiifc. 2. ex au6loritate D. Zcir. 

Habitat in corticibus olearum Gallo-provincise et Genuae. 

Affinis L. faxatili & omphalodi<i fed differt quod foliola fupra 

glaberrima funt (miiiime fcabra, incana, vel lacunoia), pallida 

crefia, nitida ; lubtus vero, ut in L. faxatili^ atra et hirfuta. 

Scutells numerofiffimae & frequentiflimGe (nee rarae), badize, 

' nitidae, margine lacvi, albo, bafi externe atrae & valdc hirfuta^, 

ut in affinibus. 

7. L. encauftus. t. 4..f 6. 

L. imbricatus, foliolis linearibus dichotomis : fupra albis nitidis; 
fubtus nigris opacis, fcutellis badiis. • 

Habitat in rupibus alpinis Sabaudia:. In fummitate montis 
Montanvert prope Chamonix, 

Frondes valde implexas, ramofifTimse, late diffufx, magis vel 
minus anguftse, marginibus fubrevolutis, fupra albx, nitida?, 
quafi encauilo ornatse, apicibus fufcis; fubtus nigrae, opacx, 
apicibus pallidis. Scutellas nitidce, fufciE, marginibus albis, 
setate faspe lobatis. 

8. L. corrugatus. 

L. foliaceus repens lobatus viridis, fcutellis teftaceo-ferrugineis 
concavis extus rugofis folio concoloribus f. 

L. acetabulum. Necker Meth. Mufc, 94, nomen ineptum. 

L. pulmonarius arboreus e cinereo viridis. FailL Paris, 
u 21. / 13. 

* L. quercifolius. Jacq. Coll. V. 3. 127. t. 9. /. 2. %. bona, fed fynonyma omni'no 
erronea. 
t L. acetabulum. Jacq. Coll. V. 3. 125. /. 9./. i. bona. 

M 2 L. pul- 



$4 Dr. Smith 'j Defcnptions 

L. pulmonariiis, inferne obfcurus, defuper e glauco fub- 
virefcens, reccptaculis florum amplioribus ac denfioribusj atro 
fulcis. Mich. Nov. PL Gen. go. /. 48, /I 2. 

Lichenoides acetabulis cutaneis & rugofis. DHL Mufc, 185. 
/. 24. /. 79. opt. 

Habitat in truncis arborum Galliae borealis. 

Foliaceus, late expanfus, e cortice parum elevatus, rugofus 
margine undulatus ; madidus faturate virens, fubtus pullus ; 
ficcus plumbeus. Scutell^ numerofx, concava;, difco ferru- 
gineo vel puUo ; externa folio concolores, varieque corrugate, 
verrucofa;, & faspe farinofas, quibus notis fpecies facile dig- 
nofcenda. 

9. L. faturninus. 

L. foliaceus membranaceus lobatus atro-virens fubtus villofus pal- 
lidus, fcutellis atro-ferrugineis fparfis *. 

Habitat in truncis arborum ad ripas Rhodani prope Va- 
lentiam, & in Sabaudia. 

Simillimus L. cochleato Dickf. Fafc. fed difFert quod fubtus 
villofus, nee utrinque lasvis eft. Folia ficca obfcure plumbea, 
villo albido. Scutell:^ numerofx, fparfae, atro ferrugineae, juniores 
marginatse, margine concolori, mox difco elcvato, margineque 
gbliterato, in tubercula abeunt. 

„r '¦ ^^' -^* cucullatus. /. 4./". 7. 
L. foliaceus ere6lus laciniatus albus, fcu-tellis pofticis cucuUatis 
fufcis. 

L. cucuUatus. Bellardi OJfervazioni Botanichef c,^. 

An DHL Mujc, t.^\,f. 56. S? 

An L. ochroleucus. LamarcJ^, Flo, Franc* K i. 81 .? 

? L. faturninus. Dickf, Crypt, fafc, a. 21. t, 6./ 8. 

Habitat 




Zhm ¦ Tttvui I . tiUi . i .n . ff4 






m 







^ 








of ten Species of Lichen. 85 

Habitat in ericetis alpinis Sabaudisc. Ex monte Cenifio ad 
CI. Bellardum mifi. 

Medius quafi inter L. ijlandicum & L. 7uvalem^ ab "utrilque 
vero diftin^tifTimus. Frons ere6la, alba, glaberrima, miilti- 
fido laciniata, marglnibus involntis, ut canaliculata, & fepe 
tubulofa, evadit. Laciniae frucStiferae ampliata;, rugofx, pof- 
tice cucullatae, Scutellas intra cucullum, fufcse. 

A Dillcnio, qui fru(5lificationem non vidit, cum L. nlvali 
confundi videtur, uti etiam ab Ehrharto in Phytophylacio, 
in meo faltem exemplario. Sed quantum fcutellis difFert ab 
illo, fatis patet ex icone in Flora Lapponica, ubi pelta Lichenis 
nivalis depingitur. 



( 86 ) 



VI , Some Obfervations on the Natural Hi/lory of the CurcuUo Lapathi 
and Silpha grifea. By Mr, IVilUam Curtis^ Fellow of the Llnnean 

Society. 

Read November 4, 1 788. 

SEVERAL fpecies of willow, particularly three of the moft 
ufeful and ornamental, the^Z^^, the fragllis, and the habylonica^ 
are w^ell known to be fubjecl to the depredations of numerous 
infe6ts, and of the larvx of the Thalccna Coffus in particular, who 
feed on the fubflance of the wood, and prove uncommonly deftruc- 
tive to the latter fpecies ; for as the larvae in each tree are generally 
numerous, in the courfe of a few years they deftroy fo much of the 
trunk, that the firft violent gale of wind blows down the tree. So 
infefted are the weeping willows in many nurferies with thefe in- 
fects, that there is fcarcely one in ten to be fele6ted free from them. 
The willows are infefted alfo in the fame way with the larvas of the 
Cerambyx niofchatus ; and wx have now the honour of laying before 
the Linnean Society fome account of the hiftory of a fpecies of 
CurcuUo J which was little fufpedled of committing funilar depreda- 
tions, but which in proportion to its fize is no lefs deftruflive; 
as alfo fome obfervations on the hiftory of a fpecies of Silpha^ dif 
covered in inveftigating the economy of the CurcuUo, 

In the beginning of June 1780 I obferved a young tree of the 

Salix 



Mr. CurtisV Obfervalions^ ^c, 87 

Salix viminalis^ which had been planted in my garden two years, and 
which was now about fix inches in diameter, throwing out from 
various parts of its trunk a fubflance fomewhat rel'cmbling faw- 
duft, which fell at its bafe in no inconfiderable quantity. This fub- 
ftance, on a clofer examination, was found to proceed from holes 
about the fize of a goofe quill, penetrating deeply into the fub- 
ftance of the wood, obliquely upwards and downwards. On its firfl 
coming out it appeared of the colour of the wood, and was moift; 
as it grew dry it became of a browner colour. The whole of the 
trunk where this internal operation was going forward emitted a 
fmell fomewhat like beer in a ftate of fermentation ; and various 
infe6ts allured thereby fettled on the tree, and feemed eagerly to 
imbibe nourilliment from it : among others the Pap'dio AlaJanta<f 
Scar aha us auratusj Apis melUferay Cantharls liv'ida^ with various fpecics 
of Mufc^r^ were frequent attendants. On the tenth of June I 
took the Cerambyx mofchatus on the trunk, but faw only one. 

Thefe extraordinary appearances ftrongly excited my curiofity ; 
I therefore often vifited the tree, and, on minutely examining its 
bark, I difcovered feveral fmall coleopterous infe6fs in its crevices, 
which at firft, from their great fimilitude, I miftook for the Cimex 
lediularius : a more clofe infpedion, however, foon convinced me 
that it was a Silpha ; and on turning to the Svjlema Nature of Lin- 
neus, I had little doubt but it was his Silpha grifea. On examining 
the faw-duft-like fubftance in its moift and fermenting flate, I dif- 
covered many fmall larvse feeding amongll; it, which when fully 
grown were about a barley-corn in length ; the body fomewhat 
flattened, of a dirty white colour, having fix fore feet and two 
hind ones ; the head of a brightilh brown colour, furnifhed with 
two jaws ; each joint of the body proje6ling at the fides, fo as to gi.ve 
it a kind of ferrated appearance ; the neck of a blackifh brown 
colour, with two or more rows of fmall dots running therefrom 
• down 



88 Mr. GuRTis'i Ohfervations on the 

down the back to the tail, which was terminated by four fmall 
fctac, turning a Httle upwards, the two lowermoft by much the 
longed. The larvae were generally found in confiderable numbers 
together, and on being difturbed ran pretty brifkly. From their fize> 
and other concurring circumftances, I had no doubt but they were 
the larv32 of the S'llpha^ feeding on the fpoils of the tree's grand 
internal enemy; which being determined to get a fight of, 1 ordered 
my fervant with a hatchet to chop out a piece of the tree, fuf- 
ficicnt for the difcovery ; when the large maggots reprefented 
tab, 5. y. I, 2. were found in perpendicularly cylindrical cavities, 
corroding the fubftance of the wood : they were about twice or 
thrice as large as the maggot of the hazel nut, and very much re- 
fembling it in Ihape, of a yellowilh white colour, grofs body, ap- 
parently without any legs, having a fhining head of a cheftnut 
colour, armed with flrong jaws. 

I put feveral of thefe, June 27th, into a pan, with fome fragments 
of the wood ; but, the chips becoming dry, they relinquiilied their 
abode and pined away. 

I fhould have taken other fteps to have reared them, had I not 
been certain that my tree ftill contained great numbers of them: 
in hopes therefore of finding them in their pupa ftate, I waited 
till the 25th of July, when, on cutting out a piece more of the tree* 
my expe61'ations were anfwered ; I difcovered feveral of them, as 
reprefented at jig. 3 : at the fame time I found on the bark of the 
tree the Curculio Lapathi, feej%-, 4, 5 ; and, on cutting farther into 
the tree, I found the fame fpecies jufl: broke forth from its pupa. 

I was then fatisfied that all the mifchief which had been done 
to the tree w^as effedlcd by this fpecies oi Curculio^ and which I had 
fome years before found in great plenty on the leaves of the fame 
fpecies of Salix. Having fucceeded in difcovering the principal cir- 
cumftance of the hiftory of this infe6l, I was not a little anxious 

to 



lirui.Tixubf.I. tab .o.p-SO. 



w:^ 



m} 



-&•< 




(m^€ii//£> ^^^^t^Yi^inix 




(Ijf^^/f^c a^r. 



'/^f-e/JL-. 



yl/'^M:jS'/-id^^ j„ ^ 



CurcuUo Lapaihl and Silpha grifea. 89 

to find the Silpha in its pupa ftate ; and after fearching for it in 
vain, on and under the bark of the tree, I found plenty of them 
under the furface of the ground, among the moift earth and faw- 
dull:, and federal alfo of the fame infect in its perfe6t ftate. 

I had no opportunity of obferving in what manner the female 
Curculio depofited its eggs ; mod probably they are laid under the 
bark at firft, or in fome crack or crevice of the tree, arifmg from an 
injury : at leaft that is the mode in which the female Phal^ena Cojfus 
depofits its eggs, and to prevent which we cannot be too much on 
our guard ; for, if the larvae have once entered the tree, we lliall in 
vain feek a remedy. If the tree therefore fuflain any injury from 
lopping, or from any other caufe, a piece of canvas, fpread over 
with fome adhefive rcfmous fubftance, Ihould be applied ; or the 
nurferyman may find his account in matting over the bodies of his 
young trees, during the months of June and July, when the moth 
comes out of its chryfalis; or perhaps brufhing them over at that 
period with fome of the new tar extra6led from fea coal, might 
anfwer the fame ufeful purpofe, 

EXPLANATION OF TAB. 5. 

Fig. I, 2. Larva of Curculio Lapathi. 

3. Pupa of ditto. ¦-'' 

4, 5. The fame infe6t in its perfe6l ftate. ^ - 

6. Larvae of Silpha grifea. 

7. One of the fame larvae magnified. ! v^- "' 

8. Pupa of ditto. * - t- 

9. Pupa magnified. 

10. The perfe6l infedt. 
n. Ditto magnified. 



N VIL Be- 



( 90 ) 



VII. Defer ipt ion of the Stylephorus chordatus^ a newffjy by George Shaw^ 
M. D. F. R, S, Fellow of the hlnnean Society, ; , - 

Read December 2, 1788, 

HAVING lately had an opportunity of examining a very un- 
common and curious fifh, which, fo far as I am able to judge, 
conflitutes a new genus, I was induced to compofe a fhort defcrip- 
tion of it; which, together with a figure drawn of the natural 
fize, will I hope be fufficient to give a clear idea of fo.fmgular an 
animal. The generic charadters may I think be defcribed thus: 

OcuLi pedunculati (feu cylindro crafTo brevi impofiti). 
Rostrum produclum, furfum fpe6lans, verfus caput membrana 

interjetSla retractile. 
Os terminale, edentulum ? 
Branchi-e trium parium fub jugulo fitx. 
PiNN-E pe6torales parvas ; ^/<?r/^//j longitudine dorfi j 
Gaud A LIS brevis, radiato-fpinofa. 
Corpus longiffimum, compreffum. 

The head of this extraordinary animal bears fome diftant refem- 
blance to that of the genus Syngnathus, and its true ftrudlure 
cannot fo eafily be defcribed in words as conceived by the figure. 

The 



Dr. SHAw'i Defcripimi rf the Slykphorus. ^X 

The roflrum, or narrow part which is terminated by the mouth, is 
conne^led to the back part of the head by a flexible leathery 
duplicature, which permits it either to be extended in fuch a manner 
that the mouth points dire6lly upwards, or to fall back fo as to be 
received into a fort of cafe, formed by the upper part of the head. 
On the top of the head are placed the eyes, which are of a form 
very nearly approaching to thofe of the genus Cancer, except that 
the columns, or parts on which each eye is placed, are much 
broader or thicker than in that genus. They are alfo placed clofe 
to each other ; and the outward furface of the eye, when magnifiedi 
does not ihew the leaft appearance of a reticulated ftruclure. 
The colour of the eyes, as well as of the columns on which they 
fland, is a clear chcftnut brown, with a fort of coppery glofs. 
Below the head, on each fide, is a con fiderable comprelTed femi- 
circular fpace, the fore part of which is bounded by the covering of 
the gills, which feems to confift of a fingle membrane of a mode- 
rately flrong nature. Beneath this, on each fide, are three fmall 
pair of branchiae. The body is extremely long, and comprefled 
very much, and gradually diminifhes as it approaches the tail, which 
terminates in a procefs or firing of an enormous length, and finiihes 
in a very fine point. This firing, or caudal procefs, feems to be 
ftrengthened throughout its whole length, or at leafl: as far as the 
eye can trace it, by a fort of double fibre or internal part. The 
peftoral fins are very fmall, and fituated almoft immediately behind 
the cavity on each fide the thorax. The dorfal fin, which is of a 
thin and foft nature, runs from the head to within about an inch 
and a half of the tail, when it feems fuddenly to terminate, and a 
bare fpace is left of about a quarter of an inch ; I am however not 
altogether without my doubts whether it might not in the living 
animal have run on quite to the tail, and whether the fpecimen 
might not have received fome injury in that part. From this place 

N 2 com- 



92 Dr. ShawV Defcripiion of the Siylephorus» 

commences a fmaller fin, which conftitutes part of the caudal one. 
The caudal fin itfelf is furniihed with five remarkable fpines, the 
roots or originations of which may be traced to fome depth in the 
thin part of the tail. The general colour of this fifh is a rich 
filver, except on the flexible part belonging to the roftrum, which 
is of a deep brown ; the fins and caudal procefs are alfo brown> 
but not fo deep as the part juft mentioned. There is no appearance 
of fcales on this fi(h. It fliould be placed in the firft order of the 
I^innean diftribution of Fiili, or Apodes, from its having no ventral 
fins. So remarkable is the appearance of the head, that 1 almofl 
doubted whether it might not with greater propriety be placed 
amongft the nantes than the fijfhes, properly fo called; till on con- 
fidering the appearance of the branchiae, and fome other particulars 
relative to the general form of the animal, I was convinced that it 
clearly and indilputably belonged to the tribe of Pifces. From the 
very fingular figure and fituation of the eyes in this creature, I have 
ventured to give it the generic name of Stylephorus ; and as the 
trivial name cannot be taken from any circumftance more properly 
than from the extraordinary thread-like procefs of the tail, I have 
therefore applied that of chordatus. The Stylephorus chordatus is 
a native of the Weft Indian Sea. It was taken between the Iflands 
of Cuba and Martinico, near a fmall clufter of little iflands about 
nine leagues from fliore, and was feen fwimming near the furface. 
The whole length of this uncommon animal, from the head to 
the extremity of the caudal procefs, is about thirty-two inches, 
of which the procefs itfelf meafures twenty-two. 



'ill- 



Tab. 6. reprcfents the animal of its natural fize. 



VIII. Dc^ 



lifin.Tran,f.I.tub.6 .J). .92. 




'/ic/'/nU/T/Z^. 



( 93 ) 



..VIII. Defcription of the Hirudo viridis, a new EngUJh Leech, hy George 
Shaiv, M, D, F. R, S. Fellow of the Limiean Society, 

Read December 2, 1788. : -• 

AMONGST the variety of fmaller animals which I have oc- 
cafionally examined, there are fome which appear to me to 
have entirely efcaped the obfervation of naturalifls ; having no 
place in the Syftema Naturae of Linnasus, or in any of the numerous 
publications which have from time to time added to the ftock of 
natural hiffcory ; fo that they may be confidered as abfolute non- 
defcripts, and as fuch may be thought more deferving a particular 
furvey. 

The animal which I now purpofe to defcribe is a fmall and very 
elegant fpecies of Hirudo or Leech, which is to be found in fuch 
waters as are more than commonly clear and cold, or at leaft fuch 
as do not very eafily freeze during a common frofl. This fpecies 
of Hirudo is not much more than the eighth of an inch in length, 
and I have feen it even lefs. In its general fhape or outline it yqyj 
much refembles the fpecies called Hirudo complanata, or the fmall 
black leech (except that the extremity of its body is of a fomewhat 
(harper form). The colour of this animal is a deep and beautiful 
grafs-green ; and, when magnified, a tranfparent edge or border ap- 
pears to furround it. The eyes are two in number, and of a deep 

black. 



04 Dr. Shaw'j- Defer Iptlon of 

black. Its motions are in every refpeft analogous to thofe of the 
Hiruuo complatiata^ fiagtuilis^ and odfoculatay which are all three fuffi- 
ciently common in this country ; but the fmall fpecies now defcrib- 
ing feems to pofTefs a greater degree of contra6lile power than the 
thi'ee former, fmce it often allumes a lliape approaching to a circular 
outline. Its general motion is an uniform fmooth progreflion, which 
is occafionally varied by a circular motion, as if turning flowly on 
an axis. ^^ %^- ^i ' . 

This little animal, after being kept for a few days in a glafs of its 

native w^ater, feldom fails to appear filled wdth 5 or 6 ova, of a very 

confiderable fize in proportion to the parent animal, and which are 

of a much flronger and tougher nature than one would eafily 

imagine; fmce, when taken out of the body, and prefled on a glafs, 

it requires a confiderable degree of force to break them. Their 

form is exa6lly oval, and their colour a deep brown. The larger 

fpecies of the genus Hirudo are known to be viviparous ; but the 

H, oSloculata is (according to Linnaeus) oviparous, and produces a 

peculiar fort of ovum, which it depofits on the ftalks of water 

plants, and from which the young is afterwards excluded. It Ihould 

feem therefore that this very fmall green Hirudo is oviparous alfo, 

and probably may depofit its ova in the fame manner. 

The remarkable colour of this diminutive fpecies is alone fuffi- 
cient to diftinguiili it at firft fight from every other fpecies yet 
known : as a trivial name, therefore, Hirudo viridis cannot be im- 
proper ; and its fpecific charader may be comprifed with fufficient 
exa6tnefs in a very few words, viz. 

H. viridis oblonga, extremitate acutiufcula. 

To the above account of the Hirudo viridis^ I mufl beg permiflion 

to add the extraordinary power of reproduction which the fmaller 

fpecies of the genus Hirudo are pofTefled of. This reprodudlive power 

is moft confpicuous in the Hfl^gnalis^ complanata^ and o^oculatay in 

which 



Linn Trarw.I. tab. 7 . p . ffo 






Q^t////fU: v^//"///V,/. 



the Hirudo v/n'Jis, 95 

which animals it almoft equals that of the polype 1 do not re- 
colle6t whether Spallanzani, and others who have attended to the 
fubje6l of animal rep rod uft ions, have included thefe animals in 
their lift. My own experiments were made in the year 1773* 
during which year thefe animals were divided in every poflible 
dire6lion ; and the divided parts, after reproduction, were again fub- 
divided, and again reproduced, without the failure of one fmgle 
part. 

Tab. 7. reprefents the Hirudo virldis both of its natural fize 
and magnified. 



•ibarn -r; 






llihli £iO..:-.-^ .. 



( 96 } 

IX. T/je Botanical Hijiory of the Canella alha, 'by Olof'SwariZy M.D, 
Foreign Member of the Linfiean Society. 



Read December If 1788. 

THIS tree, the bark of which has frequently been miftaken 
for the real Cortex Winteranus, has, like many other medi- 
cinal plants, been hitherto but imperfectly known to botanifts. 

Clufius is the firfl: who has recorded the introdu6lion of this 
bark from the Weft-hidies, which feems to have been at the be- 
ginning of the feventeenth century ; as he fays in his Exoi, lib. iv. 
cap. 4, de Canella alba quorundam, *^ Ante paucos annos (before 
1605) coepit exoticus cortex inferri, cui nomen Canellas albce indi- 
derunt ;" and it confequently became firft known about 20 years after 
Winter's return from the Straits of Magellan; whofe bark we alfo 
find to have been firft mentioned and defcribed by Clufus, in notis in 
Garciam, p. 30, under the name of Cortex Winteranus, as a compli- 
ment to the difcoverer. 

Caspar Bauhin mentions our bark feveral times in his Pinax; 
and calls it, p. 409, 

Pfeudo-caflia cinnamomea Americana, 

Canella Peruana. 

S Canella 



Dr. SwartzV Botanical HiJIcryy ^c, 97 

Canella tubis minorlbus alba ; and, p. 461, 

Cafiia lignea Jamaicenfislaureolas foliis fubcinereis, corticc pipcris 
modo acri *. 

Parkinson gave, a fhort time ?ihtr {Tbcafr. p. 1581), a prolix de- 
tail conceining the difference between thefe two kinds of bark, and 
tells us it was a common thing in his time to miftake one for the 
other. 

But John Bauhin feems to have firft confounded the names, 
by ftyling the Cortex Winteranus, Canella alba. Hiji. t. i. 1. 4, 
p. 460. 

Plukenet, who probably knew fomething more of the tree 
than its baik only, found great difficulty in difcriminating the 
fynonyma ; as he fays, in his Almag. Mant. p. 40, " Varie inter 
fe plurimum diverfa^ plantar per illarum ignorationem plane con- 
funduntur." But he docs not himfelf corre6l this fault, as he gives 
a very falfe reprefcntation of a branch from the tree, that yields 
the true Winter's Bark (Phytogr, tab. 81, f. i), which he certainly 
never faw. 

He has however enumerated the former in his Almagefl, p. 89, 
under the name of Caffia cinnamomea ; feu, 

Cinnamomum fylveflre Barbadenfium, arbor baccifera, fru6lu 
calyculato 4 pyreno, folio enervi. 

Dale (Pharmacology p. 296) very precifely indicates, that Cortex 
Winteranus is very fcarce in the fliops, and that the apothecaries 
fupply the want of it with the bark of Canella alba. 

* Several authors have formerly given this tree different names j as 
Canella Cubane. yo^f' dendr. 165. 
Arbor Jucaias. Nieremh. 294. 
Arbor cujus cortex gingiber semulatur. Laet. 24. 

Lignum feu potius cortex aromaticus. Ejufd, in fchoUo ad Cap. de Llgms aromailcls. 
MQiiard. p. 324, &c. 

O Sir 



98 Dr, Swartz j Boianical Hijlory 

Sir Hans Sloane, we find, was convinced of the difFerence be- 
tween them, as he gave I'eparate defcriptions of each, in the Tranf- 
a6lions of the Royal Society. Notwithftanding this, he feems to be 
in fome doubt (probably through want of fyftematic knowledge) 
if the difFerence might not depend upon the place of growth : at 
leafl, he fays, the one may ferve as a good fuccedaneum for the 
other ; though he confeffes that the true Winter's Bark is much 
the more aromatic of the two. 

The Ganella alba is to be found as well in the T'ranfaditons^ No. 192, 
p. 462, as in the Hiftory ofjamaicay vol. ii. p. 87 ; where the author 
calls it 

Arbor baccifera laurifolia aromatica, frudlu viridi calyculato. 

The botanical diftindtion was afterwards paid very little attention 
to by feveral writers on the Materia Medica; as Lemery, Pomet*, &c. 
And it is to be fuppofed that they have led Linnaeus (not attending 
to the evidence of the old botanifts) into this error of combining 
two different genera under the name of Laurus Winterana t : but 
he feparated this fpecies from Laurus, in the enfuing editions, as a 
diflin6l genus, and called it Winterania; under which name it has 
been univerfally but improperly known. 

This miflake has however been fully developed by the late difco- 
very of the Cortex Winteranus of Clufius and Sloane, a produ6lion 
of Wintera aromatica (from the neighbourhood of the antar6tic 
regions), whofe exiflence has remained in oblivion nearly a century, 
fmce it made its fir ft appearance in the Tranfa6lions of the Royal 
Society, in the year 1 692. 

It is the late Dr. Fothergill who has, with the afCflance of Dr. 

* Lemtry, Di£l. des Drogues^ p. 1 70. Pomet, Hijl. des DrogueSyp. 147. 
f Spec. Plant, ed. j,p. 371, «. 11. Hort. Cliff, 448. Mat. Med, 66. 196. 

7 Solander, 



cf the Cmella alba, 99 

Solander, handed down to poftcrity the real marks of that new 
genus, m vol. v. of Med. Obf. and Inq. p. 46 & feq. 

As, however, even of late, - there has been a relation fuppofed 
between thofe two genera, the following defcription, taken from a 
number of perfe6l fpecimens, will remove all doubt of their being 
totally diflina. 

Canella alba is a tree whofe ftem rifes from 10 to 50 feet in 
height, very ftraight and upright, and branched only at the top. 
The bark is whitifh, by which it is commonly known at firft fight 
in the woods. 

The branches are ere6l, and not fpreading. 

The leaves are petiolated, and grow in an alternate order, but not 
regularly. They are oblong, pointed at the end, entire in the 
margin, and without any diftindt nerves or veins ; of a dark green 
hue, a thick confiftence, like thofe of laurel, and (hining. 

The flowers grow at the tops of the branches in clufters, but 
upon divided footflalks : they are fmall and feldom open, and of 
a violet colour. 

The chara6ler of the flowers is as follows in botanical language, 
which is the mofl proper and expreilive. 

Cal. Perianthium monophyllum 3 lobum. 

Lobi ad bafm fere divifi, fubrotundi, concavi, incumben- 
tes, virides, glabri, membranacei, perfiflentes. 

Cor. Petala 5 calyce longiora, oblonga, fefllha, concava, eredla, 
duo paulo anguftiora, confiftentia, decidua. 

Nediarium urceolatum, longitudine petalorum, antherife- 
rum, deciduum. 

St AM, Filament a nulla. 

* Linn. SuppL p. 247. 

O 2 Anther a 



109. Dr. S war t z\ Botanical Hj/lory 

Anther (^ 11 linearcs parallelae, diftinclas, longitudinallter 
ne6lario extus adnatas, univalves. 
: . ., Po/kn luteum, ,.,.,. 
._ PisT. Germen fupcrum. Intra ne<flarium, ovatniti. 
Stylus cylindhcus, longitudine neclarii. 
Stigmata dno, obtuia, convexa, rugofa. 
Per. Bizcc/? oblonga unilQcylaris.a — 4.rperma. • 

Semina fubrotundo^reniformia, nauco fragili nitenti tei5la. 
The diftinguifhing marks deduced from this chara6ter are, 
Calyx trilobus." " " . 

Corolla pentapetala. 
^ - Anther a: 11 y adnatce ne6lano urceolato. 
- ¦ Bacca unilocularis, 2 — 4 fperma. 

This genus, whofe name is more properly changed to that of 
Canella, cannot be removed from dodecandria, where it has formerly 
been, notwithftanding its flowers bear fome fimilarity to thofe of 
the fixteenth clafs. But on the fame principle, Melia, Trichiliay 
Sarnvda, Erythroxylon^ &c. fhould alfo change their place, which 
feems not very jufl, as they cannot be ranged among the Columni- 
fer^e, the natural tribe of that clafs. 

There are various figures given of this plant by feveral authors ; 
as by Pltjkenet, in the Phytogr. tab. 160, f . i ; by Sloane, in the 
Hijfory r.f Jamaica, vol. ii. tab. 191, f. 2, and in the Philofophical 
Tran/acL 1692, No. 192; by Catesby, in his HiJIory of Carolina^ 
vol. ii. p. 50, tab. 50; by Mrs. Blackwell, in \^qx Icon, tab. 206; 
and, laftly, by Browne, in his Natural Hijiory of Jamaica, tab, 27, 
f. 2. The laft is the only tolerable one among them all; but it feems 
fo little underflood by Browne himfelf, that he has referred Breynia 
fruticofa, fol. fingularibus oblongo-ovatis fuperne nitidis, &c. Hiji. 
of Jam. p. 246, n. 3, to this figure, evidently that of the Camlla alba^ 
5 of 



of the C and la alba* lOl 

of whofe parts of fructification he has annexed another drawing 
on the fame plate (fig. 3), though lefs accurate and diftinguilhable. 

The tree is pretty common in moft parts of the Weft-India Illands, 
and is frequently found near the fea-coaft, but then feldom exceed- 
ing 12 or 15 feet : in the inland woods it attains a more confidera- 
ble height. 

The whole tree is very aromatic, and wdien in bloflbm perfumes 
the w^hole neighbourhood. The flowers dried, and foftened again 
in warm water, have a fragrant odour, nearly approaching to that 
of mufk. The leaves have a ftrong fmell of laurel. The berries, 
after having been fome time green, turn blue, and become at laft of 
a black glofly colour, and have a faint aromatic tafte and fmell. 
They are when ripe, as well as the fruit of feveral kinds of laurel, 
very agreeable to the Whlte-beUied and Bald-pate Pigeons (Columha 
yamakenjis & leucccephala)^\vh\ch feeding greedily upon them, acquire 
that peculiar flavour fo much admired in the places where they are 
found. 

This bark, together wdth the fruit of Capficum, were formerly 
common ingredients in the food and drink of the Caraibs, the an- 
cient natives of the Antilles ; and even at prefent it makes a necef- 
fary addition to the meagre pot of the Negroes. 

It is not necefTary to expatiate further upon the medicinal quali- 
ties of this bark, as it has been for ages in high repute, and occupies 
in the prefent Pharmacopoeia the room of the old bark of Winter, 
which by the London Committee w-as thrown out of the New 
Materia Medica, as a drug not lefs rare than hitherto impcrfe^flly 
know-n ; and there is no doubt that Canella alba may with advantage - 
be fubftituted in its room. 



The 



102 Dr. Swart z'x Botanical HiJIory, t£c. 

The annexed plate (/. 8) reprefents a branch of the tree m 
flower, and the berries of their natural fize. 

a, A flower, with its petals forcibly expanded. 

b. The fame magnified, fo as to fliew the infertion of the nee- 

tarium in the middle. 

Cy The ne6tarium magnified feparately, with the anthera longitu- 
dinally inferted. 

dy The fame cut through on one fide, and extended, exhibiting 
twenty-one linear antherae. 

e. The piftillum ftanding on the three-Iobed calyx magnified, 
with the two ftigmata. 
< fy The bacca of its natural fize, tranfverfely cut, with one feed 
remaining fixed to the fide. 

gy The feeds of the natural fize. 



X. Defcrip- 



ZinnTraru.I. tab. Sp.lO'Z. 




C^'Z-l^/ui ^//VZ . 



-^, 



( ic>3 ) 



X. Defer ipi ion of the Cancer flagnalis of Llnnceus^ by George Sbazv, 
M, D, F, jR» S, Fellow of the Linnean Society, 

Read January 6, 1789. 

THE Cancer ftagnalis of Linnaeus being certainly one of the 
mofl curious animals of the genus to which it belongs, and 
being not yet fo generally known as the reft of the Britilh fpecies ; 
I hope the following obfervations, which I have had frequent op- 
portunities of making on this infe6l, and particularly thofe which 
relate to its infant ftate, or firft appearance from the egg, may be not 
unacceptable to the Linnean Society. 

The Cancer ftagnalis is generally found in fuch waters as are of 
a foft nature, and particularly in thofe fmall fhallows of rain-water 
which are fo frequently feen in the fpring and autumn, and in 
which the Monoculus Pulex of Linnseus, and other fmaller animal- 
cula abound. At firft view this infe6l bears fome refemblance to 
the infe(5l which fome writers have called Squilla aquatica, or the 
larva of a Dytifcus ; but when viewed nearly it is found to be of a 
much more curious and elegant appearance than that animal. The 
legs, of which there are feveral pair (eleven) on each fide, are flat 
and filmy, and have the appearance of fo many waving fins, of the 
moft delicate ftru6lure imaginable. The whole animal is extremely 

tranf- 



104 Dr. SiiawV Defcnption of 

tranfparent, and the general colour of the males i^ a very hght 
brown, with a tinge of blueilli green, particularly on the head and 
legs. The females have lefs of the blueilli tinge, and incline more to 
brown, except on the fpine of the back, which is of a deep dull 
blue, and which part in the males is of a deeper brown than the reft 
of the body. The head of the male is armed with two fangs of a 
very ftrong appearance, and w^hich end in two long hooks bending 
inwards; and between the fangs lies a very curious apparatus, which 
will be more particularly defcribed hereafter. The eyes are very 
protuberant, and, as it were, furnilhed with a ftalk, as in the reft of 
the genus Cancer. The female is deftitute of the two long fangs 
which are fo confpicuous in the male, and, inftead of them, is only 
furniilied with a ftrong, thick, fliort pair of forceps : but what 
principally and immediately diftinguifhes the female, is a large, oval, 
{harp-pointed bag of ova, which is fituated underneath the lower 
part of the body where the tail commences. It is remarkable that 
the fmaller fized females are frequently furniftied with this bag of 
ova, as well as the larger ones. The tail, which is perfectly alike 
in both fexes, is of a red colour, more or lefs deep, from the middle 
to the very end, which is forked into two very fharp points. Thefe 
creatures fhould feem by their appearance to be of a predaceous 
nature, and I have no doubt that they really are fo ; the ftru6ture 
of their fangs feeming to be particularly adapted to the purpofe of 
feizing their prey : yet I never obferved thofe which I kept, to attack 
any of the animalcules which were in the fame water : on the con- 
trary, the Monoculus conchaceus very frequently aflaults them, and 
adheres with fuch force to their tails, or legs, as fometimes to tear off 
a part in the ftruggle. The C. ftagnalis delights much in funfhine, 
during which it appears near the furface of the water, fwimming on 
its back, and moving in various dire6lions by the fucceflive undula- 
tions of its numerous fin-like legs, and moving its tail in the manner 

of 



Cancer JiagnaUs of lutnnaus. 105 

of a rudder. On the leaft difturbance, it ftarts in the manner of a 
fmall fiih, and endeavours to fecrete itfelf by diving into the foft mud. 
It changes its fkin at certain periods, as is evident from the exuviae 
or floughs being frequently found in the water in which thefe ani- 
mals are kept. 

' Linnasus, as appears by his defcription in the laft edition of the 
Fauna Suecica, had obferved this infeft; but though he particularly 
mentions the appearance of the ovarium in the female, he propofes 
a moft extraordinary doubt, whether it may not prove to be the 
larva of fomc fpecies of Ephemera. He alfo repeats the fame queftion 
in the Syftema Naturae. 

The only writer who has given a very ample defcription of the 
Cancer ftagnalis, is SchaefFer, who has called it Apus pifciformis. 
He does not allow the parts on each fide to be genuine legs, but 
rather a fort of branchiae; and as the animal has no other parts 
which can be called legs, he therefore gave it the name of Apus. 
He has given a very good magnified view of the male infedl, and 
figures of both male and female in their natural fize; but thefe 
figures feem to have been taken from fmall fpecimens, and are by 
no means calculated to give a clear idea of the elegant appearance of 
the animal itfelf. 

I alfo find it figured in the 57th volume of the Philofophical 
Tranfaftions, for the )'ear 1767 ; where it is alfo defcribed, but the 
figures are inaccurate. In the defcription it is very judicioufly ob- 
ferved, that fmce they are furnifhed with ovaria replete with eggs, it 
feems not probable that they fhouldever undergo a further change, 
but that they are in their perfe6l or ultimate ftate. 

SchaefFer, who is exa6t enough in his general defcription, had no 
opportunity of obferving the infe6t in its firft ftate, or immediately 
from the egg ; it is therefore this part of its hiflory which was ftill 
wanting to complete the defcription of fo curious an animal. 

P In 



106 Dr. ShAw'j Defcription of the 

In March and April the females depofit their eggs, without any 
fettled order, and perfetSlly loofe in the water. They appear to the 
naked eye like very minute globules of a light brown colour; fcarce, 
if at all, exceeding in fize the particles of the farina in a mallow: and 
what makes this comparifon the more juft, is, that each ovum, when 
magnified, is extremely like one of the globules of farina in that 
plant ; for it is thickly befet on every fide with fharp fpines, 
the length of which is equal to about the fourth part of the dia- 
meter of the egg. Befides thefe fpines, the egg is coated over with 
a tranfparent fubftance, reaching juft to • the extremities of the 
fpines. 

This is a particularity of ftru6lure which I do not remember to 
have obferved in the ovum oi any other infe6l; and may probably 
be intended to afiift in caufing them to adhere to the fubftances on 
which they fall when depofited in the water, or elie as a fecurity 
from the fmaller water-infc6ts. 

In the fpace of a fortnight, or in cold weather rather more, they 
are hatched; and the young animals may be feen to fwim with great 
livelinefs by means of three very long pairs of arms, or rowers, which 
appear difproportioned to the fize of the animal : and indeed it bears, 
in this very fmall ftate, not much refemblance to the form which it 
afterwards afiumes; but, in the fhort fpace of a very few hours, the 
body appears confiderably lengthened, and it begins to acquire the 
remarkable character of the divided tail-fin, which fo ftrikingly dif- 
tinguiibes the parent animal. In this very young ftate the eyes do 
not appear pedunculated, but like a dark fpot on the middle of the- 
head. 

On the feventh day after hatching, they approach pretty nearly to 

the form of the complete animal, except that they ftill retain the 

two firft or long pairs of rowers or arms : the legs however, or fins, are 

at this period very vifible. After this time it lofes the long rowers, 

4 and 



Cancer Jlagnalis of Linnaus. 107 

and appears ftill more like the infe6t in its advanced ftate. It* 
growth, however, is but flowj and in all probability a very confide- 
rable time elapfes before the infe6l acquires its full fize: but this I 
cannot prefume to determine, fmce thofe which were hatched in the 
glaffes in which I kept them, died before they had acquired any con- 
fiderable fize. 

In order to obtain thefe infeds in a young ftate, nothing more is 
required than to keep the females fele6led for this purpofe in fepa- 
rate glaffes of the fame water in which they naturally refided. The 
glalfes iliould be fmall; and, when the eggs are depofited, the parent 
infedls muft be removed, and the glaffes kept in a temperate room. 

When firft hatched, they are very little fuperiorin fize to a com- 
mon mite. 

The three microfcopic views of the young animals were drawn 
with the greateft attention, and their accuracy may be fafely 
depended upon. 

Tab. 9. Fig. 1. Shews the young infecSl very foon after hatching. 

Fig. 2. Reprefents it fome hours after, at which time the forking 
of the tail is juft vifible, as well as the fegments of the body; whereas, 
in fig. I, the body has not yet lengthened itfelf fufficiently to fliew 
the joints of which it confifts, or the forking of the tail. 

Fig. 3. Shews it on the feventh day after hatching. 

It is remarkable that the Cancer ftagnalis, in its complete ftate, 
though of the moft delicate ftru6ture, is yet capable of fupporting 
a very confiderable degree of cold, as is evident from the animal ma- 
king its appearance in the middle of the day in very Ihallow waters, 
which have been almoft entirely frozen during the night. Yet 
Schaeffer reprefents thofe which he found to be exceedingly impa- 
tient of cold; and adds that he has known a whole race of them 
completely killed in their native water by a very flight froft. This 
is certainly not the cafe in our own country. I have feen great num- 

P 2 ^ berg 



io8 Dr. Shaw'^ Defer iption of the 

bers of them in the months of December and January, even imme- 
diately before and after intenfe frofts, feemingly as vigorous and 
lively as in the fpring and fummer: they muft therefore either 
plunge themfelves to fuch a depth in the foft mud as to be fecure 
from the frofl, or elfe they are not injured by being frozen for a 
time. 



MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION. 

IN an infe^l of fo confiderable a fize as this, a microfcopical de- 
fcription might feem unneceflary: this has, however, been given by 
SchaefFel^ and moft of the parts which he has mentioned, are figured 
in his work with fufficient accuracy. But it is to the laft degree afto- 
nifhing that he has entirely omitted the defcription of the moft cu- 
rious part in the whole animal*; nor does the leaft trace of it appear 
in the magnified figure which he has given of the male infect. This 
part is the apparatus for feizing its prey, and which is peculiar to 
the male; the female having only a very Ihort beak or mouth in the 
place of it. 

This apparatus confifls of two veiy long flat trunks, proceeding 
from between the long hooked parts or exterior fangs, fo confpi- 
cuous in the male infe6t. Thefe trunks are generally rolled up fide 
by fide, and carried in the fame manner as the probofcis of a but- 
terfly, fo as not to be externally vifible, except by a flight protube- 
rance; but when extended they reach to a very confiderable difl:ance, 
fo as to exceed that of the hooks or exterior fangs. 

It fliould be obferved that, from the part whence thefe trunks pro- 
ceed, the real mouth of the creature is placed, which confifl:s of two 

large 



Cancer Jlagnalis of Linnaus, 109 

large concave fcales,placed perpendicularly, and furnifhed with toothed 
edges, meeting each other. It is from each fide of this mouth that 
the trunks proceed. The particular ftru6lurc of the trunks is as 
follows. The body of each is a long and moderately broad flat part, 
extended in a ftraight line when expanded, and ending in a jagged 
extremity, befet with very fharp teeth, like thofe of a fifli : it is alfo 
divided, from the root to the extremity, into a very great number of 
tranfverfe fpaces, each of which terminates in a tooth at the edge; fo 
that the whole trunk is edged on both fides with a continued row 
of teeth. Befides the teeth, each trunk is alfo furnifhed with three 
lateral branches, or appendages, fituated at fome diftance from each 
other, on the outward edge of the trunk. Thefe lateral branches are 
armed near the ends with feveral very ftrong and excefTively iTiarp 
teeth, not only on the edge, but on the furface itfelf, and on the tips. 
Laftly, it muft not be omitted that the bafes of the fangs them- 
felves are furnilhed with a double range of extremely fliarp teeth, 
of a much larger fize than any of the others: they are placed in fuch 
a manner that the points of the teeth of one range look exaftly 
contrary to thofe of the other; and by this means mufl: enable the 
infe£t to commit the mod fcvere depredations on fuch animals as are 
its deftined food. But why the female lliould not be provided with a 
fimilar apparatus, is an enquiry noteafily to be anfwered. 

The figure marked No. 8, is an exa6l fketch of the whole appa- 
ratus of the mouth, expanded and magnified; in which the fet of 
teeth at the bafe of each of the hooks of the fangs, is very confpi- 
cuous. The upper part of the real maxillae, or toothed fcalcs, com- 
poCngthe mouth, is alfo feen; and the trunks, with their lateral ap- 
pendages, are reprefented in their relative proportions. 

It is probable that the extremities of the fangs are tubular, for at 
the tips there is an appearance of a narrow opening; but o^ this I 
cannot fpeak with certainty. 

My 



no . Dr. Shaw*j Defer iption, &c. 

My obfervations on this infedl were made long before I had feen 
Schieffer's work. I then fketched feveral parts by the microfcope, 
which I afterwards found had been already done by SchsfFer. The 
annexed plate therefore contains only a few particulars which he 
has omitted, befides the perfect infe6t, 

EXPLANATION OF ' TAB. 9. 

Fig. I, 2, 3. Cancer flagnalis in a young ftate magnified. Sec 
page 107. 

4. The perfe6l infe6t, female, natural fize. 

5. Ditto, male. 

6. Eggs. 

7. An egg magnified. 

8. The apparatus of the mouth. 



XI. 0« 



Zi/m.Tra/u.J. tab.^.p. IIP. 









^ 




C/7 /^rr^ • . ' /^^ //a//. ¦ 



( III ) 



XL On the Fejluca fpadtceaJ and Anthoxanthum paniculatum^ of Linn^us, 
By James Edward Smith, M. D. F, R, S» Prejident of the Linnean 
Society, 

Read February 3, 1 7 89. 

IN the academical difTertation intitled Plantar MartinoBurferianx, 
publifhed at Upfal in the year 1745, under the aufpices of 
Linnaeus, mention is made (page 2, No. 13) of a grafs with the 
following fynonyms: 

Graminis fpartei fpecies. , 

Anthoxanthum floribus paniculatis. 

Gramen fparteum panicula flavefcente. Rudh. Elyf, i. f, 14. 

This was copied in the Amcenit* Academ. and admitted into the 
firft edition of Species Plantarum, anno 1753, ^Y ^^^ name of 
Anthoxanthum panlculatum^ and there faid to grow in the fouth of 
Europe. 

It appears that Linnaeus defcribed this grafs from the fpecimen 
in Burfer's Herbarium only; it not being to be found, at leaft not 
under that name, in his own colleftion. 

In his interleaved copy of Species Plant, ed. i, I find the fol- 
lowing MS. note upon this plant: 

** Facies Anthoxanthi odorati, fed rigidius. Calyces quadriflori. 
Flores mutici. Forte diverfi generis. Inquirenda ulterius." 

In 



112 Dr. Smith'j Account of 

In the fecond edition of that work, the plant appears with the 
fame fynonyms, and the following note: 

" Gramen in vivo ulterius examinandum iis quibus adeft. Fades 
eft Anthoxanthi odorati. Calyces qnadriflori. Flores mutici." And 
Linnaeus adds, that it grows " in Horto Dei Monfpelienf]," which is 
a fpot celebrated for its botanical riches ever fmce the days of 
Bellcva], and which Biirfer vifited in the tour which he made 
through Europe in fearch of plants. 

No cne, however, has been able to make out what Linnseus 
meant by his Anthoxanthum paniculatum. The Montpelier bota- 
nifts have gone many a pilgrimage to the Hortus Dei, without 
findingany thing which anfwered to the defcription; infomuch that 
profcflbr Gouan, in his llluftrationes Botanicas, page 2, has afTerted 
that Anthoxanthum paniculatum ought to be flruck out of the 
Lnmasan Syllem, nothing being to be found in the place where it 
is faid to grow, but the common A. odoratum. 

In my vifit to Oxford laft year, with Sir Jofeph Banks and Mr. 
Dryander, one great obje6l of ray curiofity was the firft volume of 
Rudbeck's celebrated Campi Elyfii, which is preferved in the She- 
rardian library, and of which there are but three copies extant. I 
fought out the figure quoted for the grafs in queftion, and immedi- 
ately perceived it to be nothing elfe than the Poa Gerardi of Allioni's 
Flora Pedemontana, a plant I had gathered the preceding fummer on 
Mount Genis. Taking an exa6l copy of Rudbeck's figure, and on 
my return to town comparing it with my fpecimen, I had not a 
doubt remaining on the fubje^l. 

It appears likewife that profeflbr Gouan himfelf has gathered 
the plant ; for I find in the Linnsean Herbarium an imperfect fpe- 
cimen of it fent by him, under the name of a Feftuca, to which 
genus it really belongs. But this fpecimen Linnseus omitted to name; 
nor did be recoiled that he had defcribed the plant already. 

The 



the Ftjluca fpadice'ay tic, ii^ 

The accurate Gerard, in h is Flora Gallo-provlnclalis, has given the 
firft good defcription of this grafs, accompanied with an excellent 
figure of its panicle of flowers, but no fynonyms. Haller has like- 
wife defcribed it as a Poa, and quotes Gerard : but as it appears 
rather to belong to the genus of Feftuca, I beg leave to offer a new 
differentia fpecifica an defcription of it. 

Festuca paniculaere6ta, fpiculis ovatis quadrifloris, glumis acu- 

minatis muticis, foliis fetaceis glabris pungentibus. 
PoA panicula ere6la, fpiculis trifloris glabris, corollis acuminatis, 
calyce duplo longioribus. Ger. Gallo-prov. 91, tab. 2, f. i. 
. Poa culmo re6to, locuftis trifloris glaberrimis, calycibus ariftatis. 
^ " Hall. Hj/i, V. 2, 223, No. 1463. 
^ Poa Gerardi. Alllon. Flor. Pedeinont. V. 2, 245, No. 2201. 

Anthoxanthum (paniculatum) floribus paniculatis, Lhin.Sp. 
PL 40, Am, Acad, 1, 145. 
, Gramen fparteum, panicula flavefcente. Rudb, Elyf, V. i, 40, 
f. 14. 

Habitat in praiis et pafcuis alpinis, % 

Radix perennis, csefpitofa, fibrofa. 

CuLMi tripedales, ere61ii, ftri6ti, teretes, ftriati, glaberrimi: geni^ 

culo uno alterove purpureo. 
Folia involuto-fetacea, ftri6la, glaberrima, ftriata, mucronato- 

pungentia, glauca ; bafi dilatato-membranacea, vaginantia, 

albida. Stipule intrafoliaceae, breviflimse, aut nuUae. 
Panicula eredla, ramofa, multiflora, laxa, aureo-fpadicea, ra- 

mis plerumque binis. 
Pedunculi angulati, fubflexuofi, ere£li. 
Spiculje ovatae, compreflae, plerumque quadriflorsc, glabrae. 
Calycis valvulas fub^equales, carinatas, acuminata?, nee arii- 

tatae, margine membranaceo-pellucidse, bafi fufcas. 

Q CoROLL.i; 



114 ' ^^' Smith'j Account of 

CoROLLiE bivalves, altera majori carinata alteram ampleclens, 

calyce longiores^ acuminata;. 
Stamina. '^ Filamenta tria, breviflima. j^nthene purpurafcen- 

tes, inclufe." Gerard. 
PiSTiLLUM. Siylt duo, breviffimi. Stigmata plumofa. 
Semen unicum, oblongum, utrinque acutum, fuperne fulco 

longitudinal! notatum, fufcum. 
Obs. Panicula variat magis vel minus ramofa. 

Linnaeus feems to have referred this plant to the genus of An- 
thoxanthum, merely from the habit and colour of its flowers, in 
both which refpe<5ls they have a great refemblance to the A. odo- 
ratum. He probably could not dilTecSt the fpecimen of Burfer, to 
inveftigate its fru6lification : but Gerard as well as myfelf have 
examined the flowers living, and found them to be triandrous. Their 
beautiful gold or bronze-like colour is noticed by Gerard ; which is 
a little extraordinary, as he rarely mentions colour in his defcrip- 
tions. 

J have lately learnt from Savoy that this grafs is likely to become 
of confiderable ufe in agriculture, and that large quantities of it 
are now cultivating for that purpofe. It has vegetated in Chelfea 
garden, under the care of Mr. Fairbairn, from feed I brought from 
Mount Cenis, .... . 



A D D I- 



the Fejitica fpadkea^ ^c, 115 



ADDITIONAL REMARKS. 



Read OUoher 5, 1790. 

WHEN the preceding obfervations were laid before the Lm- 
nean Society, I named the grafs in queftion Fefluca anthoxantha, 
in alJufion, not only to its old generic name, but aHb to the yellow 
colour of its flowers, ?¦ .;j 

-, At the fame time I had a fecret fufpicion of its being the Fefluca 
fpadicea of Gouan's Illuftrationes Botanical, page 4, and Linna^us's 
Syflema Natura:, ed. 12, v. 2, p. 732. I was almoft convinced that 
the defcription found in the place laft quoted had been made from 
the very fpecimen above mentioned, now in the Linnean Herba- 
rium. In order to fettle this point, I fent one of my own fpecimens, 
.without any remarks, to profefTor Gouan, and have juft received 
for anfwer that it is certainly his Feftuca fpadicea. To this name 
that of F, anthoxantha muft therefore give way, as the Linnean 
name has the right of priority, and is indeed very apt. 

Since my former paper was written, I have alfo colle6ted fome fy- 
nonyms of the above grafs, from the Sherardian Herbarium, part 
of which I have looked over in company with profellor John 
Sibthorp. They are the following. 

Gramen paniculatum, alpinum, radice craffiflima, foliis rigidis, 
ftriatis, et afperis, panicula fufca non ariflata. MicheUl Hon, 
F'lfan, 75. 

Q 2 G. mon- 



Ii6 Dr. Smith'j Account of 

G. montanum panlcula fpadicea craffiore. I'ournef. Inf. 524. 
Nardus fpuria Narbonenfis. C Baiih. Phi. 13. 
Nardus Gangitis fpnria Norbonas. Lioh. Adverfar. 43. 

The lafl fynonym is added on the authority of Micheli, as well 
as from the defcription and incomplete figure of Lobel. Micheli 
alfo confirms the fynonym of Tournefort. 

Hence we learn, that Linnseus has totally mifapplied the abov© 
fynonyms of Bauhin and Lobel, in quoting them as belonging to 
his Nardus Gangitis. That the latter is quite a different plant, ap- 
pears from his ow^n Herbarium; and Linnaeus has committed a 
greater error in his quotation of Morifon; for inflead of fe£lion 
8, t. 13, fig. ultima of that author, the figure he fhould have 
quoted is the lafl but one, the^^^r^ ultima being quite a different 
plant from all the above : and yet I am afraid the differentia fpeci- 
fica in Species Plantarum (fpica recurva) was made from too 
great an attention to this mifquoted figure'--'. At any rate, that 
character is very bad, as being equally applicable to the common 
Nardus flridta. What is flill more unfortunate is, that the N. Gan- 
gitis is no Nardus at all, but appears to belong rather to Rottbollia, 
or at leaft to the fame genus with Rottbollia incurvata (^gilops 
incurvata Linn.), as probably does the Nardus Thomas likewife. 

The foregoing obfervations exhibit a feries of errors and mifcon- 
ceptions, which can fcarcely be paralleled in the botanical hifloiy 
of any other plant, and thofe the errors of the greatefl men ; owing 
to which, the Anthoxanthum paniculatum and Nardus Gangitis 
have been enveloped in more obfcurity, and the labours of enqui- 

* The figure of Morifon is fo confufed, that this error could hardly be avoided. It 
is certain, however, that all his three fpikes of flowers belong to the laft figure. 

6 ring 



linn.Tmfu:I. tabW.p.Jll. 




the Feftuca fpadicea, ^c. II7 

ring botanifts have been more frequently rendered abortive than 
in any fimilar cafe, except thofe, indeed, in which writers on the 
Materia Medica, with their fovereign power of confounding, have 
interfered. Such miftakes are not here pointed out with any invi- 
dious intention, but folely from a love of truth. Contemptible 
indeed are the critics who can triumph over the occafional inequah- 
tiesofan Homer; nor lefs contemptible and ungrateful are thofe 
who, while they live but in the light they borrow from Linnaeus, can 
exult over imperfections, which are avoided only by perfons who 
have never exerted themfelves in the fervice of fcience or man- 
kind. 

Tab. 10. is an exa6l copy of Rudbeck's figure above quoted, 
traced from his Campi Elyfii in the Sberardian Library. 



XII. On 



( "8 ) 



XII. On the Migration of certain Birds, and on other Matters relating to 
the feathered ^'ribes. By William Markwich^ Efq, Affociate of the 
hinnean Society, 

Read February 3, 1789. 



THE difFerent accounts which have been pubUflried by va- 
rious authors relating to the oeconomy of birds, have 
always appeared to me exceedingly ftrange and unfatisfaclory. I 
was willing to attribute thefe contrarieties to a variety of reafons,. 
I thought perhaps that different caufes operated upon thefe little 
animals, and led them to adopt different modes of living, fuitable 
to the urgency of the occafions. But at length I became rather 
confirmed in the idea, that many authors wrote not from their 
ovv^n obfervation, but from guefs, and the vague accounts which 
others had given before, who had ftill received them from others 
no better acquainted with the fubjeft than themfelves. This de- 
termined me to make accurate obfervations of what iliould really 
occur. I therefore offer the following remarks to the Linnean 
Society, as matters which are to be depended upon, and which I 
myfelf faw: and I the more readily enter upon this talk, as I lliould 
apprehend if different obfervers ftationed in different parts of the 
kin-^dom would take the trouble to notice the occurrences which 
happen, not only the catalogue of the Britilh fpecies would be 
mod correctly afcertained, but their oeconomy illuflrated fo effec- 
I tually, 



Mr. MarkwickV Ohfervations on Birds, 119 

tually, that doubt and ignorance would no longer obfcure fo cu- 
rious a fubje6l. 

Catsfield, the place where thefe obfervations were made, is fitu- 
ated near Battle in Suflex, about five miles from the fea-fide. The 
country round it is finely diverfified with hill and dale. Though 
there is no large river near it, yet there is much oozy fpringy 
ground, and many woods, fome of a tolerably large extent, in the 
neighbourhood. 

„I will firfh fet forth in one fynoptic table the feveral particulars 
which I have been led to notice, and then mention the refult of 
my obfervations, by way of giving a general notion of the feveral 
incidents. After which I will add fome few other illuftrations, 
which could not eafily be comprifed in thefe tables. 



A TABLE, 



A TABLE of the Appearance and Difappearancc of the following BIRDS. 



[To front Page 121. 



vmlo rnjlica. 



Martin — 



1768 
Ap. 14 

Nov. 1 3 



17^9 1770 1771 ^772 1773 '77+ 1775 177^5 1777 1778 1779 1780 17^' ^7^2 
Ai). 12 A,,. iS Ap. 27 Ap. 12 Ap. 17 Ap. 13 Ap. 14 Ap. 16 Ap. 12 Apr. 7 Ap. 14 Apr. 8 Ap. 22 

Oct. 25 Nov. 10 oa.28 Nov.ij o a. 18 Od. 16 Oft. 24 oa. 22 Qa.27 o a. 26 oa.29 nw. 3_ 0'^1-J5_^.P'_J.. 

Ap. 20 May 8 Ap. 17 Ap. 26 Ap. 24 May i Ap. 30 Ap. 19 Ap. 23 Ap. 26 Ap. 14 Ap. 29 May 12 Ap. 26 
Od. 4 0-t. T[ Oft. 28 Nov. 1 3 Nov. I Oa. 2 2 Oa.14 Od. 22 Oa.26 Od. 15 Nov. 3 Sep._7_Nov^ 



1783 
Ap. ,3 
Nov. 6 

May I 
Nov. 6 









29 May 2 May 13 May 16 Ap. 28 May 14 May 9 
23 An. 26 oa, 10 Sep. 2 1 — An. n 


May 2 May 9 May 
Sep. 2 Sep. 


6 May 12 May 18 May 13 
8 Sep. I Au. 28 Nov. 6 


'¦ 




Od. I oa. 


Sand IViarUii— ii,.;,,,;/y ,;A/nfl. 
Fir a ften 






Ap. 21 May 16 Sep. 23' July 3 

— oa. 10 Sep. 21 Sep.?? ' Sep. 3 


Ap. 10 May 7 Apr. 
Sep. 2 Sep. 


8 Ap. 26 May 13 July 25 
8 Sep. I Au. 28 Sep. t 


TL T 






Wry., . . .„:..,::!,:-- 

Full ken 
_^ Not feen after 


Apr. 
Sep. 


3 Ap. 13 Ap. 15 Ap. 

2c Aiig.25 06L 


33 Ap. 13 Ap. 10 Mar.31 Ap. 13 Ap. 18 Mar.2r^ 
6 Sep. 14 Sep. 2 ¦ Aug. 5 Sep. 6 


Ap. 21 Ap. II Ap. 

Au. 26 Sep. 


10 Ap. 14 Ap. 25 Ap. iS 
14 Au. 29 ¦ - 


C uckoo—~Cu:ulus canonu, 
Firll fecii 
Not feen after 


May 

oa. 


t Ap. 71 Av. 27 May 

6 S.p.-- --''-25 ¦ 


I May 5 Ap. 29 Ap. 29 Ap. 17 Ap. 30 

— Au. 26 Augai; Sep. 2 Sep. '? Oa. 1 1 


Ap. 23 Ap. 25 Ap. 
Sep. 23 


23 Ap. 19 Ap. 26 Ap. 28 
1 . 


Goat Sucker — Caprhnulgus Europaus. 
Seen 










— May 29 ¦ 


Turtle 'Dovc—ColumL Tur.'ur. 
Seen 










— June 1 1 June 4 ¦ 


Woodcock— ScokpaxRuJiu '.'. 
Firft feen 
Not feeii after - -r 


Ap. 


— od.i5?oa. 13 oa. 

12 Apr. 7 Apr. 6 Ap. 


24 oa. 12 oa.22 oa.2o oa.2i oa. i8 oa. 20 

18 Mar. 23 Mar. 19 Ap. 17 Ap. 13 Apr. 6 Mar, 17 


oa.24 oa. 12 oa. 

Apr. 5 Mar. 2 1 Apr. 


19 oa. 30 oa.23 oa.14 

8 Mar. 2 1 Mar. 2 7 Apr. 6 


Red Wing— 7.77-6/kj iImcus. 
Firft feen 
Not feen after 


Dec, 
Ap. 


14 Dec. 1 8 Mar 

13 Apr. 7 Apr. I Ap. 


2 Nov. 2 . Nov.25 Mar.22 Jan. 9 

18 Mar, I Apr. 2 Ap. 17 A p. 13 Apr. 6 Mar. 17 


oa F-r , 




Apr. 5 Mar. 1 5 Apr. 


8 Ap. 14 Mar. 2 7 Apr. 6 



loyfton Crow. — Corvvs Comix. 
Firft feen 
Not feen aftu 



Snipe — Sco/r.fuix CiJ:ni:!'fo, 
Fiiftfeen - 

Not feen after 



N0V.17 Nov. 7 oa. 21 oa. 18 . Dec. I — _— _, 

Ap. 14 Ap. 14 Ap. 18 Feb. 21 Mar.25 Ap. 13 Apr. 6 



Oa.30 
Apr. I 



Dec. 23 
Ap. 14 



Jan. 15 
Apr. 3 



Nov.ii Nov. lo Nov. 8 oa. 19 oa.23 ^^' 3 oa. 16 Nov. 9 
Mar.31 Ap. 1 8 Apr. 2 Apr. 7 Mar. 19 Ap. 14 Apr. 6 



Jan. 29 Nov. 13 Nov.ii Sep. 29 
Apr. 5 Mar, 1 3 Apr. 8 Mar. 21 



Dec. 8 
Apr. 6 



Fieldfare — Turclus pilaris. 
Firft feen 
Not feen after 



Nov. 18 Nov. 5 N0V.15 Nov.io Nov.io oa.26 Nov. 6 Nov.io Od. 27 

Apr. I Ap. 18 Apr. S Ap. lo Ap. 17 Ap. 13 Apr. 6 Mar. 14 Apr. 5 



Dec,25 

Apr. 8 Ap. 14 



Dec.2g 
Apr. 6 



Jack Siiipe — Scolopax Gallinula. 
Firft ken 
Not {!¦ 



SIficiiij orAberdavi'i - 



N0V.20 Dec.28 Dec.26 



Ap. 18 Mar. 1 6 Apr. 7 



Dec. 1 9 



Jan. 29 



Dec.28 



— Dec.2l Dec.29 
Ap. 13 Apr. 6 Feb. 8 Apr. 5 Mar. 1 3 Ap. 1 9 Ap. 14 .¦ ¦ Apr. 6 



Willuv. VV';- 



, ,.ij^..LiSpinus. 

er 
I'htenicurui, 

.:r 



Apr, 5 Ap. 20 



Ap. 22 



Ap. 10 Ap. 15 
Ap, 30 



jT.pr. 6 Ap. 15 Ap. 27 Ap, 17 Apr. 5 Ap. 14 Ap. 21 Ap. 22 Ap. 17 Ap. 23 Ap. 20 Ap. 30 Ap. 30 Ap. 17 Ap. 25 Ap. 27 
Sep. 25 Sep. 22 Sep. 29 Sep. 30 Sep. i 5 Sep. 18 Sep. 9 Sep. 20 Sep. 11 Sep. 18 Sep. 14 Sep. 23 - Sep. 6 Sep. 30 Oa. 2 



.'r 


: 


Apr. 6 Ap. 29 May 16 Mar.30 Ap. 18 Ap. 16 Ap. 20 Ap. 22 Apr. 3 Ap. 
oa. iS Oct. 4 oa.23 Sep. 29 Sep, 16 Sep. 20 Sep. 21 Sep. 27 Sep. 1 1 Sep. 


14 Apr. 7 Ap. 19 Ap. 16 Apr. 3 A.Lp. 18 Ap. 13 
28 Sep. 30 oa. I Sep, 13 Sep. 4 Sep. 20 Oct. 7 


ui l.nfcinia. 


- 


Ap. 12 Ap. 16 May 8 Ap. 23 Ap. j8 Ap. 21 Ap. 20 Ap. 26 Ap. 20 Ap. 

Nov. I 


17 Apr. 8 Ap. 17 Apr. 5 Ap. 14 May 3 Ap. 28 
Sep. 23 Sep. 14 ~ oa. 2 


V-, iu •• i"- ">yhia. 


- 


Ap. 23 Ap. 17 May 5 Ap. z6 Ap. 26 Ap. 20 May 3 Ap. 21 Ap. 19 Ap. 
0£l. 6 Sep. 21 Aug.28 oa. 6 Sep 16 Sep. 13 Sep. 9 Sep. 13 Sep. 5 Sep, 


19 May 2 Ap. 21 Ap. 30 Ap. 14 Ap. 25 Ap. 26 
29 Sep. 20 Sep. 23 Sep. 20 Sep. 7 Sep. 20 Oa. 2 


Wheat. '-.'-I' — nXi'itu:!!u O'cnanthe. 
Firft feen 
Not feen after 


- 


May 5 Ap. 15 May 6 Ap. 5 May 23 Ap. 16 May 8 June29 Ap. 21 

oa. 6 oa. I oa.26 Sep. 17 Sep. 20 oa. 3 oa'i4 Sep. 5 


— May 18 Apr. 3 Ap. 22 Mar. 26 Mar. 13 Apr. 3 




Fly Catcher — ?/lufclcapa gr'yola. 

Firft fen _ 
Not ft:eii after 


- 


May 6 May 1 1 May 13 May 9 May 17 May 14 May 1 2 May 21 May 21 

oa. (> Aug.25 oa. 6 Sep. 29 Sep. 19 Sep. 2 Sep. 13 Sep. 


— May 14 May t8 May 14 May 16 May 16 May 14 
21 Sep. 13 Sep. 23 Sep. 14 Sep. 22 An, 31 Oa. 2 



JLand Rail — Rallus Crtx, 
Firft feen 
Not feen after 



Whin Chat — MotaciUa ruhetra. 
Firft feen 
Not feen after . 



BLick !..;')' — M'Aacilla Airicapilla, 
Firft hun 
N )t Ic.cn r.ftcr 



Redback'dButchL'rBird--L//w2v.r Cullu 



Sep. I Sep. 23 Aug.27 
Nov. 26 Nov. 3 oa. 24 



Sep. 9 Sep. I Sep. 12 
Nov. 7 Od. 22 



Sep. 2 Sep. 4 Sep. 14 Sep. I Au. 24 Sep, 29 Sep. \i Sep. 2 

oa.14 06t. 19 oa. 27 . Nov. 4 ¦ ¦ ¦ — '- 



Ap, 30 M:'y 10 Ap. 17 May 5 Ap. 20 
Sep. 2 1 vScp. 2i oa. 6 Sep. 5 Sep. 16 



Aug. 7 Au, 20 May 10 Aug. 4 



Sep. I 7 Sep. 23 



Au. 20 An. 28 Au. 26 



Ap. 30 



A p. 22 — 

oa. 6 - 



Ap. 23 May 7 



May 20 Ap. 23 May 29 
^^^. 19 



Ap. 30 Ap. 14 Ap. 26 May 15 

Sep. 23 Sep. 14 Sep. 4 Oa. 2 



May 1 2 May 9 July 1 o May i r May 9 



June 7 



N. B. When I fay that I have not feen a bird after fuch a date, T do not vvif'n to be underlTood that I aUvays faw it on that day. Generally fpeaklng, I had miffed it fome little 

time before, but entered my memorandum on the day which I have exprelfed. 



Mr. Markwick'j Obfervatlons on Birds, i^i 



EXPLANATORY REMARKS en i be foregoing TABLE, 

Hirundo ruftica — the Swallow, 
The Swallow's firft appearance was generally about the 12th of 
April, never earlier than the 7th, or later than the 27th of that 
month ; and I never faw it later in the year than the i6th of No- 
vember, and then only a fmgle bird or two, the generality of them 
difappearing long before that time. 

Hirundo urbica — the Martin, 

This bird is fomewhat later m its appearance than the foregoing 
one, we having never feen it earlier than the 17th of April ; but in 
general it does not appear till towards the latter end of that month, 
and frequently not till May, having one year not been feen till the 
1 2th of May; and I never faw it later in the year than the 13th 
of November ; but, like the former, the generality had difappearcd 
before. 

Hirundo A pus — the Swift. 

This bird is later in its appearance than either of the two former 
ones, being hardly ever feen before the beginning of May, twice 
only on the 28th and 29th of April during the whole fixteen years ; 
and its lateft appearance was on the i8th of May; nor does it re- 
main fo late in the autumn as the former ones, the lateft 1 have ever 
obferved it being the 2d of September. 

Hirundo ripari a — the Sand Martin. 

As this bird is not near fo common in this country as the other 
fpecies, my obfervations on its appearance muft be uncertain, though 
I believe it generally makes its appearance very early, as I once ob- 

R ferved 



Mr. MarkwickV Obfervatms on Binh, 121 



EXPLANATORY REMARKS on the foregoing TABLE. 

Hirundo ruflica — the Swallow, 
The Swallow's firft appearance was generally about the 12th of 
April, never earlier than the 7th, or later than the 27th of that 
month ; and I never faw it later in the year than the i6th of No- 
vember, and then only a fingle bird or two, the generality of them 
difappearing long before that time. 

Hirundo urbica — the Martin^ 

This bird is fomewhat later m its appearance than the foregoing 
one, we having never feen it eadier than the 17th of April ; but in 
general it does not appear till towards the latter end of that month, 
and frequently not till May, having one year not been feen till the 
1 2th of May; and I never faw it later in the year than the 13th 
of November ; but, like the former, the generality had difappeared 
before. 

Hirundo Apus — the Swift. 

This bird is later in its appearance than either of the two former 
ones, being hardly ever {t&i\ before the beginning of May, twice 
only on the 28th and 29th of April during the whole fixteen years ; 
and its latefl appearance was on the i8th of May; nor dees it re- 
main fo late in the autumn as the former ones, the latefl 1 have ever 
obferved it being the 2d of September. 

Hirundo riparia — the Sand Martin. 

As this bird is not near fo common in this country as the other 
fpecies, my obfervations on its appearance muft be uncertain, though 
I believe it generally makes its appearance very earl}^, as I once ob- 

R ferved 



122 ^ Mr. Markwick'^ Obfervcitions 

ferved it on tlic Gth, and another year on the loth of April ; but 
fometimes, indeed, I did not fee it till late in the year, owing, 1 fup- 
pofe, to their being fcarce. The lateft I ever faw it in the autumn 
was the 25tli of September. 

Jynx Torquilla — ihe Wry Neck. 

The firfl: appearance of the Wry Neck for fixteen years together 
was generally about the 13th of April, never earlier than the 
26th of March, nor later than the 25th of April; and the lateft of 
its continuing to appear was the 14th of September. 

Cuculus can or us — the Cuckoo, 

The firft of the Cuckoo's being heard for fixteen years together 
was generally about the latter end of April, never earlier than the 
17th of that month, nor later than the 5th of May ; and it conti- 
nues to fing till about the latter end of June, the 26th being the 
lateft that I ever heard it. After that it is filent, though it conti- 
nues to make its appearance till the beginning of September, the 
14th of that month being the lateft period of my feeing it. What 
Willoughby and others aflert concerning this bird's breeding in the 
neft of a fmall bird, I know to be a fa61:, having myfelf taken a young 
Cuckoo out of the neft of an Hedge-fparrow, and kept it in a cage 
till the approach of winter, when it died, 

Caprimulgus Europaeus — the Goat Sucker, 
I have only taken notice of feeing this bird in the year 1781, 
on the 29th of May. 

Columba Turtur — the turtle, 
I have only taken notice of the appearance of this bird in two 
years, 1781 and 1782, which was on the 4th and nth of June. 

Scolopax 



on the Migration of Birds, 1 23 

Scolopax Rufticola — the Woodcock, 

The firfl appearance of the Woodcock, according to my journal 
during fixteen years, has been generally in October, never earher 
than the 12th of that month; and as to its continuance with us, I 
never faw it later than the loth of April. We have had two or 
three inftances, in this neighbourhood, of young Woodcocks being 
fhot in the fummer-time ; and I think I once faw an egg of this 
bird taken out of a nefl: in the neighbourhood : but their breeding 
here is very uncommon, and owing, I fuppofe, to accident; the 
old ones perhaps having been wounded by fportfmen in the winter, 
and fo difabled from taking a long journey in the fpring, 

Scolopax Gallinago — the Snipe, 

This bird alfo generally makes its firfl appearance in 06lober : I 
once faw it fo early as the 29th of September, and the 14th of April 
was the laft of my feeing it here. 

Scolopax Gallinula — the Jack Snipe, 

This bird is not fo frequently met with as the foregoing, fo that 
I cannot fpeak with certainty as to its appearance; though I believe 
it is fome time later than the common Snipe, the earlieft oi my fee- 
ing it being the 20th of November, generally not before December; 
though it feems to continue with us late, as I have feen it on the 
19th of April. 

Corvus Cornix — the Royjion Crow, 

This bird, being feldom feen far from the fea-coafl, has not been 
veiy frequently obferved by me. The earliefl of its appearance, ac- 
cording to my journals, was the 17th of 0(5lober; and I never faw 
it after the 14th of April, that being the latefl of my obferving it, 
according to my notes. 

R 2 Turdus 



124 Mr. Markwick'j Cbfervations 

Turdus pilaris — the Fieldfare'. 

This bird is very uncertain in its appearance. Some years great 
flocks of them are early to be feen ; other years very few, and thofe 
not till late in the winter : which variation, as to the time of their 
appearing, is canfed, as 1 fnppofe, by the different degrees of cold in 
the different winters. The earlieft appearance of this bird that I 
have obferved, was on the 26th of OtSlober, and the lateft of my 
feeing it was the 8th of April. 

Turdus iliacus — the Red Wing. 

This bird is alfo very uncertain as to the time of its firft appear- 
ance, but feems to be later in its viiit than the foregoing ; for, ac- 
cording to my journal, the 14th of December is the earlieft of its 
appearance, and in general I did not fee it till January or February. 
In March and the beginning of April, w^hen the weather is fine, 
the Red Wings affemble together on the tops of high trees, and fmg 
very melodioufly ; foon after which they leave us, the 13th of April 
being the latefl of my feeing thefe birds. 

Rallus Grex — the Land Rail, 

The firft appearance of this bird I cannot fpeak to with any 
great certainty, having feldom met with it before the feafon for 
fhooting Partridges, September ; though it has twice made its ap- 
pearance in Auguft, once on the 24th, and the other time on the 
27th. And how long it continues with us is alfo uncertain; 
though I do not recollect ever to have fepn it fo late in the year as 
November. That it is a bird of paffage, and that its flay with us 
is fliort, is moft probable; for it does not breed here, and cer- 
tainly leaves us before the winter commences. From its generally 
flying very flow, and to all appearance wxakly, one would fuppofe 
it ill adapted to long and quick flight : but that it can exert itfelf 

on 



en the Migration of Birds, 125 

on occafion, I have been an eye witnefs ; having feen^it fly with 
amazing fwiftnefs, equal to that of any Hawk : it alfo runs very 
faft. 

Frlngilla Spinus — the Sijkin, or Aherdavine, 

This httle bird was obferved only in the years 1768, 1769, 1774, 
1780 and 178 1. It is undoubtedly a bird of pafTage, fpending a 
fhort time with us early in the fpring, probably in its paffage from 
one country to another, as it neither breeds with us in fummer, nor 
appears here in the winter. I never faw it before the 5th of April, 
nor after the 30th of the fame month. I obferve it feeds on the 
feeds which are in the cones of the fir. — With us it is called the 
Barley-bird, from its appearing about the time of fowing barley, and 
continuing with us no longer than the barley-fowing lafls. 

Mr. Latham fays it is not unfrequent in England in the winter. 
With us it is feldom feen at all. I never faw it in the winter. The 
longed flay I ever obferved it to make, was from the 10th to the 
30th of April in the year 1780. 

Lanius CoUurio — the red-bached Butcher Bird. 

This bird breeds with us, and generally appears about the 9th 
or loth of May ; having never been feen by me earlier than the 9th 
of May, and one year I did not fee it till the 7th of June. 

MotacillaPhosnicurus — theRedJlart, Mot.Trochilus — Willow Wren. 
Mot. Sylvia — White Throat. Mot. Oenanthe — Wheat Ear, and Mot. 
Lufcinia — Nightingale. 

Thefe fmall birds generally appear pretty early in April, and 
continue to make their appearance till September, fometimes rather 
later, as I have feen the Wheat Ear and Willow Wren in Otflober. 
The fame temperature of the air in the fpring, which invites the 

flies 



126 Mr, MARKwrcK'i Obfervatlons 

flies and other fmall infe6ls to come forth, brings thefe birds to 
feed on them. But whether they come out from their hiding places, 
as the infers do, or whether they come from far diflant countries, 
is a queftion not yet determined by naturahfts. Probably the life 
of infe6ls is terminated with the fummer, and the infe6ls of the 
following year are produced from eggs, which are hatched by the 
warmth of the fpring: but no naturalift ever afTerted that this was 
the cafe with birds. Their life is certainly prolonged from year 
to year ; but how they difpofe of themfelves during the winter, is 
the queftion. I never faw thefe birds in the winter, the earlieft of 
my feeing any of them being on the 13th of March, when I faw the 
Wheat Ear. 

Mufcicapa Grifola — the Fly Catcher, Mot. Atricapilla — Black Cap, 
and Mot. Rubetra — Whin Chat. 

Thefe birds appear fomewhat later than the foregoing, but I 
never faw any of them in the winter. 

I will here beg leave to mention a few particulars refpe6ling 
other birds which have engaged my notice : the white Water-wag- 
tail, the grey W^ater-wagtail, and the yellow Water-wagtail. 

How the Water- wagtails difpofe of themfelves in the winter, is 
the moft difficult to account for of any birds I know ; for though 
the generality of them difappear in the autumn, yet they are often 
feen in the middle of winter. If there happens to be a fine day, and 
the fun fhines bright, thefe birds are fure to make their appearance, 
chirping brhkly, and feemingly delighted with the fine weather : 
whereas, perhaps, they had not been feen for three weeks or a 
month before. In Ihort they are never feen in winter but on a fine 
day. Where do they come from ? Certainly not from a far diftant 
country ; there not being time for a very long journey in the 

fpace 



on the Migration of Birds, 1 27 

fpace of a fingle day ; and befides, they never feem to be tired or 
lifelefs, but are very brilk and lively. 

Sterna Hirundo & Sterna minuta — Sea Swallows. 

Thefe birds are, as I fuppofe, fummer birds of paflage; appearing 
on our fea-coafts about April or May, and continuing with us till 
the autumn. The earlieft that I have obferved the great Sea Swal- 
low, Sterna Hirundo, was the 15th of April ; the leiTer, or Sterna 
minuta, the 24th of April; and the black Sea Swallow, Sterna fifli- 
pes? is fo rare, that in fixteen years I obferved it but once, and that 
was on the 28th of April. 

As to the time of their leaving ns, I cannot fpeak with any cer- 
tainty. I once fawthe leffer Sea Swallow fo late as the 15th of October. 

Motacilla Atricapilla — the Black Capy 

Sings very prettily, and has a note fomewhat like the Nightingale; 
for when I firft heard it, I took it for that bird, till I had feen it. 

Charadrius Oedicnemus — the Stone Curlew, 

Whiftles in the evening. I heard this bird June r7th, 1770, 
amongft the corn on the downs not far from Eaftbourn, where I 
fuppofe it breeds. 

Corvus Corax — the Raven, 

There feems a wonderful antipathy between this bird and the 
Corvus frugilegus, or Rook. In the year 1778, as foon as a Raven 
had built her neft in a tree adjoining to a very numerous rookeiy, 
all the Rooks immediately forfook the fpot, and have not returned 
to build there fmce. 

At the Bifhop of Chichefter's rookery at Broomham near Hafl:- 

ings in Suffex, upon a Raven's building her neft in one of the 

2 trees, 



128 ' Mr. MarkwickV Ohfervatlons 

trees, all the Rooks foribok the fpot ; but they returned to their 
haunt in the autumn following, and built nefts there the fucceeding 
year. When this circumilance took place, the good Bifliop was 
very ill. The flight of the Rooks (for at firfl: the caufe of it was 
not known) was confidered by the country people as ominoufly 
portending the death of the pofleflbr. However, his Lordiliip hap- 
pily recovered ; and, in the mean time, the flight of thefe poor 
prophets was better accounted for. 

Motaciila Rcgulus — the golJeti-crowned Wren. 

This bird, though the fmallefl of any except the humming-bird, 
and to appearance the moil; dehcate, is ytt hardy enough to endure 
the cold of our fevereft winters ; for it is now (January 26th, 1776) 
the fevereft weather I ever remember, and yet it is chirping before 
me. 

Before I conclude this article, I will beg leave to mention a few 
birds, found in my neighbourhood, which are rarely met with. 
And I do this the more readily, as I am defirous of affording evi- 
dence of the fouthern fituations in v/hich they have been taken. 
They are the Scolopax lapponica, the fmall Curlew, or red-breafied 
Godwit', the Tringa Glareola, or brown-fpotted Sandpiper-; the 
Ampelis garrulus, or Chatterer \ and the Fringilla Montifringilla, or 
BraJiibling, 

The Tringa Glareola has never been figured by any author. I 
made a dravring of it from a frefh fpecimen, with the following 
defaiption. 

Tringa Glareola — the Broivn-fpotted Sandpiper, 
The Wood Sandpiper. Latham^ s Synopjls^ vol. iii. p. 172, fp. 13, 
Tringa (Glareola) roftro Iscvi, pedibus virefcentibus, corpore fufco 
albo pun6lato, pe6tore albido. Linn, Syjl, Nat. vol. i. p. 250. 

Tringa 



en the Migration of Birds* 1 29 

Tringa nigra albo punctata, pe6tore maculato, abJomine fiibal- 
bido, pedibus virefcentibns, Fn, Suec. 152. 

Tringa, Brijfons. Ornithologia^ vol. ii. p. 259. 

This bird was lliot by the fide of a little frcfh-water rivulet In 
the parilli of Battle, and font me by a friend. I do not find it men- 
tioned by any author except Linnseus ; who, in his Syftema Na- 
ture, feems to think it only a variety of the Tringa Ochronus, or 
Green Sandpiper : but, in his F'auna Suecica, he takes notice of it 
as a diftindl fpecies, calls it Tringa Glareola, and defcribes it as fol- 
lows, which agrees with the bird that was fent to me : " Magni- 
tudo Sturni, dorfum fuicum albo punclatum, uropigium album, re- 
miges fufcsE, prima rachi nivea; fecundariae apicis margine albas, 
reprices fafciis albis fufcifq; laterales magis albx, minufq; fafciatae, 
abdomen albidum." He alfo fays, " Habitat in fylvis uliginofis." 

This bird is rather more than nine inches in length from the 
tip of the bill to the end of the tail, and near a foot and a half 
from tip to tip of the wings when extended. Its bill is fmooth, 
black, an inch and a half long. The noftrils are long, and 
placed near the head, and each mandible has a furrow running 
along it, more than half way from the head. From the bill to 
each eye there goes a blackifli line, and over each eye is a 
white fpace, and it is whitifli under the chin. The top of the 
head, neck, and bread, are of a brownilh aCh-colour (Ireaked, efpe- 
cially on the breaft and cheeks, with a darker browniili aili-colour. 
The back is of a dufky brown, tinged a little with olive-colour, and 
marked pretty thick with fmall whitiili fpots. The rump and co- 
vert feathers of the tail are white. The tail confifts of twelve fea- 
thers, marked with dark-coloured or blackilli and white bars, but 
the two outermoft are almoft entirely white; and the nearer they 
are to the outfide, the more white they have. The quill feathers 
of the wings are all over of a dark dulky brown colour, and the 

S covert 



130 Mr. Markwick'j Ohfervations on Birds, 

covert feathers of a dufky brown tinged with olive-colour, tliofe 
next the back being marked with fmall whitifh fpots. The legs and 
feet are of a greenifh colour, and naked above the knees. The toes 
are long, the outermoft joined to the middle one by a membrane as 
far as the fir ft joint. The claws are black. 

Tab. XT. reprefents the Tringa Glareola fiamewhat lefs tTian 
the life. 



XIII. rhe 



Lum.Tnuut. I. tab. U.j^JfiO. 




y^ y /t^-a C /a?'rc^ /a . 



i 131 ) 



XIII. ^heHifwryand^cfcrlptionofanewSpeclesofFucus. By Thomas 
Woodward^ Efq, Fellow of the Linnean Society, 



A 



Read April 7, 1789. 

PLiVNT belonging to the order of Alga^ of the Ciypto- 
gamia clafs of Linnasus, and fuppofed to be a non-defcript 
Fucus, has been long found in great quantities on the beach at 
Yarmouth, amongft other rejedtamenta of the fea. A fpecimen of 
this was fent fome years ago by Mr. Pitchford to the late ingenious 
Mr. Ivightfoot, whofe knowledge of this clafs of plants was un- 
doubtedly great, and whofe judgment defervedly held in the higheft 
cfteem. In anfwer to Mr. Pitchford's enquiries, Mr. JLightfoot de- 
clared that the plant was new to him, and was not, as he believed, 
defcribcd in Mr. Hudfon's Flora Anglica, or by any author with 
which he was acquainted; but, till it could be found in fru6lification, 
nothing could be pofitively afcertained concerning it. On the ar- 
rival of the Linnean Herbarium in England, I carried a fpecimen 
to London, and compared it, along with my worthy and learned 
friend, in whofe pofTeffion the Herbarium now is, with the fpe- 
cimens of Fuci there preferved; but we found none that at all cor- 
refponded with it. In this flate it refted, it not being ever known 
from whence the plant, though fo frequent on the Yarmouth beach, 
was waiTied ; when in the month of October, 1787, I vifited Cro- 
mer, on the north-eaft coaft of Norfolk, with a view of examining 
what fea-plants grew on the rocks there, as they are called by the 

S 2 iaha- 



132 " " Mr. Woodward'^ Defcription of 

inhabitants. Thefe rocks are formed of fea-pebbles and other large 
ftones, which are thrown up by the waves on thatexpofed ihore in 
jmmenfe quantities, and are agglutinated by the fea-flime into 
mafies of various fizes ; thefe are left dry by the recefs of the tide 
to a confiderable diftance. The furface is very unequal, and con- 
fequently numerous ponds of fait w^ater, various in fize and depth, 
are feen amongft them; and as thefe in a calm day are perfectly 
clear and pellucid, the fea-plants growling on the ftones are there 
exhibited in great beauty. Amongfl others I obferved great plenty 
of the above-mentioned plant ; io much, that I had reafon to 
conclude, that the principal part of wdiat was found on the beach 
at Yarmouth, and elfewhere to the fouthward, was waflied from 
this part of the coafl:. I fearched for its fruirtification, but in 
vain ; and therefore contented myfelf with obferving its mode of 
grow'th, without thinking of making any particular defcription of 
the plant. In the following winter I received fome fpecimens of 
marine plants, frefh from the fea, from Mr. Wigg, fchool-mafler, 
at Yarmouth ; to whom w^e are obliged for the difcovery of many 
rare and fome new fpecies of Algae, and who deferves the warmeft 
applaufe for his induftry in collecting, and fagacity in afcertaining 
numerous plants, almoft unaflifted by books. Amongft thefe I w^as 
equally furprifed and pleafed to find this plant in a ftate of fru6li- 
fication, and ftill more to obferve, on examination, that the fructifi- 
cation was particularly curious, and unlike that of any fpecies of 
Fucus hitherto defcribed. It being now clearly afcertained that 
this is a non-defcript Fucus, it may be diflinguilhed by the name of 

Fucus fubfufcus. 

Fronde filiform!, ramofifiima, ramis ramulifque fparfis, fohis 
fubulatis fubalternisj fruclificationibus paniculatis, capfuiis fub- 
oClofpermis. 

Place in the genus, next to Fucus filiquofus. 

Hah, Cromer on the coafi of Norfolk, Duration 0? 

DESCRIP- 



a new Species of Fucus. 133 



DESCRIPTION. 

THE plant adheres to the flones under the furface of the 
water, without any vifible root, immediately branching into nume- 
rous ftems. Individual frons about fix inches high, the fize of fmall 
twine, round, and rough towards the bafe with the remains of 
broken branches ; the lower part of the principal branches having 
the fame appearance. Branches numerous, growing without order; 
towards the fummit much crowded ; nearly the fize of the Item : 
thefe again branched in a fimilar manner ; the lafl clothed with 
fliort fubulate leaves, growing in a fubalternate order, but not 
regularly. 

The fru6lification is fituate in the bofom of the leaves and of 
the fmaller branches, on (hort fruit-ftalks, each of which appears to 
the naked eye to bear one or more capfuleSj about the fize of the 
fmalleft pin's head. Thefe capfules, viewed with a good common 
eye-glafs, have the appearance of flowers, confifting of feveral 
flefhy petals, much refembling the germina of the Sedums; but 
when moiftened with water and put under the microfcope, it ap- 
pears that they are compofed of feveral lanceolate capfules, on 
Ihort fruit-ftalks forming a panicle, or fometimes a fimple umbel ; 
each individual having the appearance of a filiqua, and containing 
fix or eight round fomewhat compreiTed feeds, difpofed in two pa- 
rallel lines. Thefe feed-vefTels appear to have neither valves nor 
diire[Mincnt, nor are the feeds attached to any ligament; therefore 
it is truly acapfule of one cell, and not either filique or legume. 

The colour of the plant is reddifh brown, or fubfufcous, when 
frelh ; when dry it is nearly black ; but if moiftened, or held before 
a ftrong light, the real colour may be obferved. The capfules are 
pale and femi-tranfparent, the feeds the colour of the plant. 

When 



134 Mr. WoodwardV Defcrlption, &c. 

When dry it llirinks from the fize of fmall packthread to that of 
coarfe thread, and the branches in proportion. 

By its being fo conftantly found on the beach in winter, I lliould 
fuppofe its duration annual, and its time of flowering the autumn, 
being in feed in winter. 

REFERENCE TO THE FIGURE. Tab. 12. 

Fig. T. A fmgle ftem complete. This is the reprefentation of a 
dried fpecimen, of a young and perfectly vigorous plant, but not in 
a ftate of fructification. When older, many of the fmaller branches 
and leaves arc broken off, giving the plant a more naked appear- 
ance — natural fize. 

2. A fmall branch of another dried fpecimen, with the fru6lili- 
cation — natural fize. 

3. A part of ditto, magnified. The leaves and ends of the 
branches, when highly magnified, appear flightly bifid, but not fo 
exactly or regularly as the figure reprefents. Whether this be the 
real growth, or only owing to accidental breaking by the waves, I 
could not afcertain; but it was the fame in all the branches which 
I examined, and is therefore probably natural. 

4. Different appearances of the fructification, 

5. A fingle capfule very highly magnified, and fliewing the feeds 
as naturally difpofed. This is rcprefented in the figure rather too 
broad, and too acutely pointed. 



XIV. Account 



L iiui. Trails .1 . taJj .12 . p . l?>-i . 




-yn-, i, 



( 135 ) 



XIV. Account of a finguhr Conformation in the JVings of fome Species of 
Moths. By Mr, Efprit Giorna, ofTurin^ Foreign Member of the Lin- 
nean Society, 

Read June 2 , 1789. 

Venlet tempus quo ifla, quae nunc latent, in luccm dies extrahat. 

Linn, in Inlro'Uu ad Syjl. Nat, 

MEPRISEE dans les terns anciens, TEntomologie doit, on pent 
dire, fa nailTance dans le fiecle paiTe aux foins des Aldrovands, 
des MoufFetSj des Rays, &c. et fon accroiflement dans celui-ci anx ex- 
periences et aux erreurs de Goedart. Get obfervateur patient, en 
parcourant la vafte foretde la nature prefque fans experience, et fans 
guide ''='", s'efl fouvent egare; 11 a pris des efFets pour des caufes, et a 
donne comme cara^leres des marques, qui n*etaient qu*accidentelles, 
Mais fes erreurs piquerent la curiofite des favans ; on voukit s'af- 
furer de ce qu'il avait avance, on obferva, on fit des experiences, 
et chacun s'eft emprelTe a publier fes obfervations, et fes decou- 
vertes. 

Cette fcience cependant etait encore dans fon enfance il n'y a que 
quinze ans: In incunahilis adhuc tenerajacet, difait Fabricius en 1775 t; 
mais le penchant de Tefprit humain pour la nouveaute, le champ 

* Les auteurs qui I'ont precede ont travaille beaucoupj mais leurs ouvrages, prefque fans 
ordre, et fans fyfteme, encore ne pouvaient fervir de guide fur aux obfervations de Goedart. 
t In Prolegomenis ad Syftema Entomologise, Flenfburgi, 1775. 

5 V vafte 



136 Mr. GiosnaV Account of 

vafte que cette matiere ofFre pourles decouvertes, fon amenite, et I'liti- 
lltequVlle laifTe entrevoir par fon etroite liaifon avec la Phyfique, la 
Chymie. et rAgriculture, ont engag^i beaucoup de perfonnes a en 
entreprendre Tetude, et lui ont merite Tattention des plus favans 
pcrfonnagcs dc i'Europe ; de forte qu'aujourdhui elie grandit a vue 
d'oeil par les travaux innombrables de fes amateurs, comme il a ete 
force douze ans apres de I'avouer le meme Fabricius, Entomologia Inge- 
n'WfJiudioque miiltorum niitrita^ nunc in vegetiorem a-tatem la:ta fejiinat ¦-'''¦. 

11 eft done de I'interet commun de la fociete litteraire ; il eft du 
devoir meme de chaque individu qui s'appliaue a quelque branchede 
la phyfiquc, de faire part aux autresde fes travau)?, et de leurs reful- 
tats ; et c'eft pour remplir autant qu'il eft en moi ce devoir, que je 
viens vous offrir, Meftieurs, ce que Tetude de la nature m'a fait de- 
couvrir dc nouveau a legard des infecles. 

En m'occupant dcpuis quelques annees, par gout et par amufe- 
ment, a Thiftoire naturelle, j'ai pu obferver qu'il y a beaucoup d'ef- 
peces inconnues encore dans les infe6les, et que d'un autre cote les 
auteurs ie lont plus a les multiplier en donnant pour differences cfef- 
peces, celles qui n'etaient que de fexe, ou des fimples varietes. Si les 
circonftances repondent a mes defirs, j'aurai I'honneur de vous 
communiquer, MefTieurs, mes remarques fur ce fujet; ]c ne vous en- 
tretiendrai dans ce moment que de la decouverte d'un cara^lere 
qui m*a frappe dans la plupart des Sphynx et des Phalenes. 

Si e'en eft une, je ne puis mieux Tadreffer qu'a la fociete qui ne 
s'eft propofee pour but, que de decouvrir et d'etaler aux yeux du 
public les trefors de la nature, et de rendre immortels les ecrits et le 
nom du pere, et reftaurateur de Thiftoire naturelle, le grand 
Linne. 

11 eft etonnant, que parmi tant d'obfervateurs attentifs et clalr- 

* In Praefat. ad Mantiffam Infedorum, Hafnige, 1787. 

voyans 



the Wings of feme Species of Moths, 137 

voyans, qui nous out detaille jufqu'au moindre dcs inteflins d'un In- 
fe6le; il eil: etonnant, dis-je, que leur Ibit echappee dans les Sphynx 
et dans Ics Phalencs une partie exterieure fi vifible, et fi frappante 
telle que celle que j'entreprends de vous decriie. 

Un cara6leie meffa9able de la bonte et de la fagefle du Createur 
eft empreint dans toute la nature : le moindre inle6lc partage fes 
foins et merite fa prevoyance. Les Papillons deftines a voltiger dou- 
cement de fieur en iieur pendant le jour dans la campagne ouverte, 
et fournis d'ailes tres-largcs a leur bafe, fuitout les inferieures, n'ont 
a craindre aucun dcplacement de ceiles-ci dans leurs courles, et font 
fuffifamment garantis de tout accident facheux de ce c6tc-la: mais les 
Sphynx, et nombre de Phalenes, dont les ailes font tres-ctroites a 
kur bafe, qui volent la nuit avec beaucoup de rapidite, et prefque 
toujours dans des brouffailles, il etait tres-facile, qu'en heurtant con- 
tre quelque obftacle leurs ailes fe derangealfent en pallant les inferi- 
eures par dclTus les fuperieures; et I'animal embarrafle par cet accideiit 
pourrait tomber, et fe perdre dans I'herbe, dans des branches, ou 
dans I'eau, ou devenir la proie de fes ennemis. L'Auteur de la na- 
ture a pourvu a cet inconvenient; il a muni les ailes de I'animal d'unc 
bride cjui les retient a leur place lans les gener dans le vol. 

De la bafe de I'aile de deilbus fort une pointe vers fa partie ante- 
rieure, plus ou moins longue lelon la groifeur de I'infcc-tc, de nature 
cruftacee, dure, elaftique et refiflante, dedinee a foutenir I'aile fupe- 
rieure a fa place, cjue j'appellerai pour cela Report ou Appui (Fukruin). 
Cette pointe fait un angle avec lebord deTaile inferieure a pcu pres 
de 15 jufqu'a 30 degres ••'', comme vous pouvez le voir par la figure 

* Cet angle eft celui que j'ai obferve dans les infe6tes deiTccbes avec les ai'es ctendiic'^, 
dont les bords exterieurs de celles de deflus font a peu pres en ligns droite, de force que 
cet angle eft a mon avis le rr;cme que doit faire cette pointe avec I'aile inferieure, lorfqus 
Taniroal vole. Du refte je con^ois que cc Reff)rt doit tenir a un mufcle, qui le regie a vc- 
lonte, ou felon le befoin de Tinleclie ; ct que lorfqu'il eft tranquillc, cette pointe fe t.O'. c 
couches Ic long du bord dc I'aile, et Tangle pour Icrs devient nul. 

T ire 



138 Mr. GiornaV Account of 

ire(TAB. i3.)ci-iointe*: maiscen'efl pas tout, MefTienrs; rintelligence 
de vues du Crcateur fe manifefte encore davantage par un anneau 
attache a la nervure principale de I'aile fuperieure. Get anneau 
(fig. 2.) defline a recevoir ce refTort, le laifTant gliffer avec facilite, le 
tient dans fon afliette fans lui oter la liberte des mouvemens. 

Cc fecond caradere ne fe voit que dans les males ; et il eft facile, 
felon mon idee, d'en deviner la raii'on : Creaioris fapient'ijjimi omnifci- 
eniia nil frujira creavit^ fed omnia artijiciojijfime injiruxh^. Les males vo- 
Icnt beaucoup, et avec une tres-grande viteffe; il faut qu'ils parcou- 
rent de longues efpaces pour chercher les femelles, et remplir le 
grand butdela nature, et font par confequent tres-cxpofes aux dan- 
gers que nous venonsde dire: les femelles au contraire, faites pour 
attendre les vifites des mfdes, volent fort pen, et lentcment; ce grand 
foin de la nature leur ferait done inutile, auffi quelques-unes n'en ont 
point, et celles qui en font pourvues ne I'ont ni fi long, ni fi folide 
que les males ; et il n'eft compofe dans la plus grande partie que 
d'un paquet de plufieurs lilets minces reunis enfemble. 

Voila un fyfteme: direz-vous, Meflieurs, qu'il eft: facile d'en batirl 
C'efl une maladie univerfelle que la vanite produit, que I'amour 
propre fomente, et qui repand plus de brouillards que de clarte fur 
les connaiiTances humaines. Les fyftemes dans les fciences font 
comme les feux follets qui egarent et deroutent fouvent les voya- 
geurs. L'homme commence ordinairement par rever ; fon amour 
propre lui infmue pen a pen qu'il a devine le fecret de la nature; il 
s'en fiattc, il le le perfuade eniuite, il fonde des experiences fur fon 

* La fig. ire (Tab. 13.) reprefente une des ailcs infcrieures du Sphynx Convoiviu'i m-a.\€, 
avec le RefTort a, b, qui fort de la bafe de cette aiie. La fig. 2de fait voirle meme Sphynx 
pardeiTouF, avec les ailes etendues, ou Ton voic I'anneau d, qui re9oit le Reflbrt />,<•, com me 
il eil naturcllement dans I'animal. 

f Linn. Amcen. Academ. vol. iii. p- 253. 

fyfteme, 



the Wings of fome Species of Moths. ijq 

fyftcme, au lieu de fonder fon fyfteme fur des experiences; il le dc- 
bite enfin, et ce n'eft fouvept qu'un rcve. 

Votre remarquc eft tres-fenfec, MefTieurs ; mais ce n'eft point un 
fyfteme que je vous ofFre; ce n'eft qu'une idee, une fimple conjcdurc. 
Rien dans le monde n'eft fait a I'hafard ; fed in Jinem cerium atque de- 
terminatum^ certamque ob caufam^ qua vel propagatloni animalis infervit^ vel 
confervationi* . Or il m'a paru de I'entrevoir ce l:>ut de la fageffe dc 
Dieu dans le caraclere que je viens de vous decouvrir de ces ia- 
fe6les. Je vous expofe ce que j en penfe, et c'eft a votre jugemcnt 
que je foumets mes reflexions. 

Voici les Sphynx et Phalenes que j'ai examines a cet egard; je vous 
les prefente felon I'ordre de Linne; je marque dans quelques-uns le 
longueur de ce Reftbrt en lignes prifes fur le pled de Londres. Je ne 
donne que le nom firaple de ceux que j'ai trouve manquer de ce 
cara6lere. 

SPHYNX. 

,, J Male. Je. n'en ai pas. 

1. ocellata. | Pemelle. Reffort tres-court fans anneau. 

^.y J M. Reftbrt avec anneau. 

2. lilias. |p^ Je n'en ai point. 

3. Populi. 

.. r M. Reftbrt avec anneau. 

4. INeni. I ^ j^ ^^ j^^ ^^^ ,^- p^-,^^. ^,^^^ 

^ , ,. r M. Reftort .lono-. li. 4 avec "1 ^„„^^„ 

JM. Reftort 1. 3!: avec anneau. 

6. Atropos. I y Reftort en paquet de 20 fftets. 

r M. Reftort avec anneau. 

7. Elpcnor. | p^ Reftort plus court fans anneau. 

Q r M. Reftbrt avec anneau. 

o. PorceLus. | ^ j^ ^^ j^- ^^^ ^- p^jj-jf appergu. 

« Linn. Amosn. Acadeni. vol. iii. pag. 252. 

T 2 9. ftella- 



140 



Mr. Giorna'j Account of 



M. 
F. 



9. fLellatarum. 4 

10. Euphorbiae. \ y 

11. fuciformis. 



12. FilipendulDe. \ ^p' 

fM. 

13. Phegea. \ F. 

14. cattra. | p 

15. Stances. j p' 

16. pigmee de la J M. 
collea. d'Ernft. I F. 



Reflbrt avec anneau. 
Reflbrt en paquet de 4 filets. 

Reflbrt avec anneau. 
Je ne lui en ai point vu. 

Reflbrt avec anneau. 

Reflbrt en paquet de plufleurs filets fans 
anneau. 

Reflbrt avec anneau. 

RefTort en paquet de 10 filets fans anneau. 

RefTort fenl fans anneau. 
Reflbrt en paquet de plufieurs filets tres- 
minces. 

RefTort avec anneau. 

Paquet de 5 filets fans anneau. 

RefTort avec anneau. 

Paquet de 4 filets fans anneau. 

RefTort avec anneau. 

Jene lui en ai point obferve. 

P H A L ^ N A. 

Attac'u 



17. Pavonia major. 

18. Pavonia minor. 

19. Tau. 

20. quercifolia. 

21. ilicifolia. 

22. Rubi. 

23. Quercus. 

24. laneflris. 

25. Vinula. 

26. verficolora. 

27. Mori. 



Bombyces elingues, alts reverjis. 



r M. RefTort avec anneau. 

1 F. Paquet de plufieurs filets. 



28. Populi, 



the Wings of fome Specks of Moths. 141 



28. Populi. 
28*. Neuftria. 



29. Caja. 1 F, I 



Bombyces elingues, alts deprejjls^ dorfo laavi, 
M. Reflbrtde 1. li avec anneau. 



Reflbit fans anneau. 

-i,. r M. Reflbrt tie 1. if avec anneau. 

^ ' * If. Petit paquet prefque imperceptible. 

i-r I M. Reflbrt avec anneau. 

3 . par. ^ p^ Paquet de 15 filets fans anneau. 

^, r i_ r M. Reflbrt avec anneau. 
q2. Chryforrnaea. i tt -d 4- r 
•5 -^ L r. Paquet lans anneau. 

^j J. . rM. Reflbrt avec anneau. 

2^' • L F. Jen'aipas examine la femelle. 

Bombyces elmgues, alls deprejjis, dorfo crijlato. 

jM J fM. Te n'en ai point. 

34. pudibunda. I p_ ^^q^^j j^ ^ ^i^j^ f^^^ ^^^^^^^_ 

^. f M. Reflbrt avec anneau. 

35. gonoftigma. | p^ 

36. caeruleoce- J M. Reflbrt avec anneau. 

phala. 1 F. Paquet de 3 filets fans anneau. 

37. CoflTus. 

38. palpina. 

Bombyces fpirilingues, dorfo Icevi, ails defexis, 

y r M. RelTort avec anneau. 

39. Auhca. I p^ Paquet de 5 filets fans anneau. 

40. RuiTula. J'en ai examine 6, que j'ai, et je les ai toutes trouvees avec 

le refTort et I'anneau: feront-ce tous males? II y a une 
autre Phalene qui a les ailes un peu plus etroites de 
couleur fauve foncee; les taches font precifement les 
memos que dans la precedente; j'en ai obferve deux, 
que j'ai; je nc leur ai point trouve de relTort: ne fe- 
rait-ce pas peut-etre la femelle de ceile-la ? 

41. grammica. 



142 ¦ ' Mr. Giorna'j Accouftt of 

r M. RefTort avec anneau. 
^ ° L r . Paquet en tilets laris anneau. 

Bombyces fpirillngues, dorpj criflato^ alis defitxis* 

T 1 ^ • ¦ r M. Reffort avec anneau. 
42. Libatnx. \ ^^ o 4. r 
^ y V . Paquet lans anneau. 

^r y J M. Reilbrt de 1. i\ fans anneau. 

^^* " ' If. Paquet tres-court de plufieurs filets. 

I^Q^uae fpirtlingues^ dorfo hjc'-ces^ abfque crifta. 

T^ . t r M. Reffort avec anneau. 

44. Dominula. s i:- n ^ j ^ r c\ 4. 

^^ L ^' Paquet de pluiieurs iriets. 

TT r M. Reffort avec anneau. 

^^* ' If. Paquet de 3 filets. 

46. Batis. Paquet en filets. Je n*en ai qu'une feule, et probable- 

ment cell: la femelle. 

1 V- r M. Reffort avec anneau. 

47. glyphica. I p_ p^^^^^^ j^ ^ ^^j^j^_ 

j^ J I r M. Reffort avec anneau rouge tres-elegant. 

^ * -^ ' ' If. Paquet de plufieurs filets. 

z. r r M. Reffort de I. 2? avec anneau. 

49. bponla. I p^ j^ j^^ p^. p^g examinee. 

^ f M. Reffort avec anneau. 

^ ' P ' If. Paquet de 3 filets. 

p , J M. Reffort tres-gros a proportion avec anneau. 

"^ * * \ F. Paquet de 3 filets. 

T- . . f M. Reffort avec anneau. 

<2. Fraxini. s t:^ t t • 

^ t 1^ . J e nc i ai pas . 

n\ ff-" r M. Je n'en ai point. 

53. L.liry litis. I p^ Paquet de plufieurs filets. 

^. 1 ^ f M. Reffort avec anneau. 

54. meticulofa. | p_ p^^^^^^ ^^ ^^^^^^ 

55. gothica. Reffort avec anneau. Je n'en ai vu qu'une feule; il 

y a apparence que c'eft le male. 

Geometric 



the Wings of fome Species of Moths, 143 

Geometra pedHnata^ alts pojiicis fuhangulojis, 

56. Ia6leana. ' 

c^-], vernaria. 

58. Thymiaria. • 

Geometra: pedt'imcornes^ alls rotundatts, 

^ -• / M. RelTort avec anneau. 
59-1 1 ^^^ ' j^ p^ Paquetde 20 iiiets. 

60. pufaria. 

61. papilionaria. 

Geometra fettcornesy alls rotundatis. 

62. clathrata. 

63. bilineata. 

iT , r^ ^ 4. r M. RefTort avxc anneau. 

64. Cratxgata. | p_ p^^^^^ ^^ gj^^^_ 

65. pufiella. RelTort avec annean. Je n'en ai qu'une. 

z-^ -p, ,, r M. RefTort avec anneau. 

^ 'If. Paquet fans anneau. 

On voit par cette lifte que, parmi les Sphynx que j'ai obferves, il 
n'y a que celuidu peuplier, qui foit depourvu de ce RelTort. Cela me 
confirme toujours plus dans mon opinion. Le Sphynx du peuplier 
eft des plus tranquilles que je connailTe ; il vole rarement; et c'eft 
celui qui a les ailes a proportion les plus larges : d'ailleurs le port 
feul de fes ailes marque I'inutilite d'un tel moyen pour les retenir a 
leur place: les ailes de delTous, lorfqu'il eft en repos, depalTent toujours 
celles de delTus. La meme reflexion a lieu pour toutes les Phalenes 
que vous trouverez qui manquent de ce RefTort, telles que la Pavo- 
nia major, minor, Tau, Quercifolia, &c. 

Ce cara^tere ne pourrait-il pas faciliterla clafTification d'ailleurs fi 
embrouillee encore dans les Lepidopteres, et Turtout dans les Pha- 
lenes ? Les halteres ne font-ils pas une claiTe dans les infetSles a deux 
5 ailes 



144" Mr. Giorna'j Account of 

aiies felon Scopoli*? Cette partie du moins eft bien plus fenfible que 
celles de la bouche, fur lefquelles eft fonde Je fyfteme de Fa- 
bricius. 

Mais fi cette partie ne fuffitpas pour etablir une clafte, elle pourra 
du moins nous fer\ ir pour diftinguer le fexe, qui eft encore douteux 
dans plufieurs de ccs infe6tes ; audi m'a-t-dle deja eclaire fur le 
doute dans iequel nous lailfent les auteurs, et nommement la Col- 
lection des Papiilons d'Europe parErnft a I'egard du Sphynx a ailes 
tranfparentes (fuciformis). II y en a de deux fortes; un a le bord 
des ailes couleur de marron ainfi qu'une bande a travers le ventre; 
I'autre a cette bande noire avec le bord des ailes verdatre-obfcur; ils 
font parfaitement femblables dans le refte. La plupart des auteurs 
out pris cette difference comme la diftindlion de fexe; d'autres ont 
doute fi e'en etait une d'efpece: cette derniere opinion eft la vraie; 
j'en ai trouve de toutes les deux fortes avec le reffort et anneau, et 
avec le reffort fans anneau ; done il y a male et femelle dans toutes 
les deux, et font par coniequent deux efpeces differentes. Ce fera une 
funple variete, vous me direz, Meffieurs; mais cela ne peut etre; car 
vous m'enfeignerez que les varietes fe rencontrent rarement, or ces 
deux Sphynx font aufli frequens les uns que les autres. 

Le reftbrt des femelles eft compofe dans la plupart d'lin paquet 
de iilets, comme je vous I'ai faitobferver ci-defilis: ce paquet eft re- 
tenu dans les Phalenes par une touffede poilsjqui partent de la feconde 
nervure de I'aile fuperieure, et font recourbes vers le bord exterieurf; 
mais le nombre de ces iilets n'eft pas le meme dans toutes les ef- 

* Entomolog. Carniol. Ord. vi. Halterata, ciavula fub fingulis alls. 

f Voyez. la fig- 3. (Tab. 13.) Elle rcprefente la femelle de la Phalene Pronuba vue 
en defibus. D'un cote elle manque de I'aile fuperieure pour laiffer voir le paquet a compo- 
fe de 3 filets bien diflini^s et un peu groflis au microfcope ; et de I'autre cote on voit cc 
paquet b, r, qui repofe fur la toufFe de poils d. L'aile detachee z, fait voir que ce paquet 
fort de la bafe de I'aile. 

peces 



Linn Trans. I. tab.J.'i f M-i- 




'•ytcu^Le^ry:u^ JpM"-'-- 



the Wings of feveral Species of Moths » 1A5 

peces (autre remarque a faire). Dans les infe6tes que j'ai obferves 
avec le microfcope, je Tai trouve de 3 filets dans les uns, de 4 dans 
d'autres, de 5, de lo, de 15, &c. jufqu a 20, comme vous Taurez ob* 
ferve par ma lifte. Ce nombre cependant en eft conftammeiit le 
meme dans tous les individus de la meme efpece. Cette difference, 
ce me femble, pourrait encore nous fervir de guide pour nous tirer 
des labyrinthes de I'entomologie. 

La colle6lion des papillons d'Europe d'Ernft nous donne une 
quantite d'efpeces de Sphynx a ailes tranfparentes (Linn. Legitlmce alls 
mtegrls ano barhaio)^ comme aufli de Sphynx beliers (Linn. Adfclta 
hahitu et larva dlverfce). Sont-elles veritablement toutes des efpeces, 
ou ne font-elles que des fimples varietes? Le nombre des filets qui 
forment le Reflbrt des femelles determine et toujours conftant a 
chaque efpece, ne fen^irait-il pas a nous debrouiiler ce cahos? 
C'eft a vous, Meflieurs, a en juger. 

Vous qui poffedez des coUeiSlions complettes,vous pouvez verifier" 
mes obfervations, porter votre examen fur les Spliynx et Pha- 
lenes qui manquent dans ma lifte, et en tirer peut-etre des notions 
plus heureufes que je ne faurai le faire. 



NOTE. 

THIS curious apparatus affixed to the wings of Moths, which 
Mr. Giorna confiders as a new difcovery, has been long known to 
many of the Englifh collectors of Butterflies and Moths: it is 
claimed (and a good account given of it with accurate figures) by 
Mr. Mofes Harris, in a work of his, entitled, J^n Efay preceding a Sup' 
plement to the Aurellan, wherein are confidered the Tendons and Membranes 
^..y- - . U of 



146 Mr. GiornaV Account^ ^c* 

of the wings of Buiierfiies, &c. In this work the ufe and a6tIons of 
thefe fprings appear to be well defined and explained; and Mr. 
Harris obferves that it pertains only to the males, the females ha- 
ving, inftead of the fprings, four fmall hairs or briflles : it was 
thought, however, proper to publifh this account, as Mr. Giorna 
has carried the matter further than Mr. Harris, and it is hoped will 
excite others to purfue the fubje(5t. 



tOli:.^ vv 'I'HLI-D'I 



XV. Ohfer^ 



{ 147 ) 



XV. Objerjbations on the Language of Botany, By the Rev, l!honias 
Marty n^ B, D, F, R, S, ProfeJJbr of Botany in the Univerfty of Cam- 
bridge^ and Fellow of the hinnean Society, In a Letter addrejfed to the 
Prefdent, 

Read 03iober 6^ 1789. 

SIR, 

1HAVE little doubt of your agreeing with me in opinion, that 
nothing has contributed more to the rapid progrefs which 
the fcience of Botany has made within the laft thirty or forty years, 
than the excellent language which Linnasus invented, and which 
has been by common confent adopted, not only by thofe who follow 
the fyftematic arrangement of the illuftrious Swede, but by all who 
fludy Botany as a fcience. Without pretending to any peculiar 
forefight, we may venture to affirm, that the Linnean language 
will continue to be in ufe, even though his fyftem fhould in after 
ages be negle6ted ; and that it will be received into every countiy 
where the fcience of Botany is ftudied, with certain modifications 
adapting it refpe6lively to each vernacular tongue. 

So long as Botany was confined to the learned few, there was 
no difficulty in ufing the terms of the Linnean language, exadly 
as the author had delivered it : but now that it is become a ge- 
neral purfuit, not only of the fcholar, but of fuch as have not had. 
what is called a learned education; and fmce the fair fex have 

U 2 adopted 



1^8 Profejfor MartynV Obfer vat ions 

adopted it as a favourite amufement; it is become necellary to have 
a language thatfhall be fuitable to every rank and condition, a lan- 
guage that may be incorporated into the general fund, and carry 
with it the proper marks of the mother tongue into which it is to 
be received. 

In order to attain this defirable end, I beg leave, Sir, to fubmit to 
your corifideration, and to that of the fociety over which you pre- 
fide, thefe two fundamental principles : Firft, that we ihould adhere 
as clofely as pofTible to the Linnean language itfeif : and fecondly, 
that wc Ihould adapt the terminations, plurals, compounds and 
derivatives, to the ftru6lure and genius of our fterling Englifh. 

That we ought to adopt the Linnean terms themfelves, is fuffi- 
cicntly apparent from the great advantage refulting from the ufe 
of one univerfal language. If we change or tranflate thefe terms, 
we lofe all this advantage, and become unintelligible to botanifts of 
every other nation, without any benefit gained on the other hand: 
for thefe new terms will be equally difficult even to the Englifh 
ftudent; and will require as much explanation as the Latin or 
Greek, many of which have prefcription and poiTeirion to plead in 
their defence. To load the fcience and our Englifh tongue with a 
ufelefs addition of new words, is certainly an evil to be avoided. 

Thus, forinftance, in the parts of fru(5lification, if we adopt the 
terms ejnpalement, blojhm^ chive ^ thread, tip^ point al^ feed-bud^ fi^fU 
fummit^ they require explanation, in their appropriate fenfe, as much 
as calyx, corolla, fiamen, Jilament, anther a, piftillum or piftil-, germen or 
germ^ ftyle and Jligma^ which are already familiar to the ears of all 
who have fludied the fcience of Botany, even though they have 
little or no acquaintance with the learned languages. For the fame 
reafons legume is to be preferred ^ofiell or cod,Jiliqua ovjiiique to pod, 
flick to pouch, glume to hujk or chaff, culm to fir aw, digitate to fingered^ 
Qvate to ^gg^d, pifmatifid to feather-clef t. 

Some 



on the Language of Botany^ i^q 

Some few Englifh terms, it muft be owned, were iifed by the 
learned Grew; fuch as empakment^ chhe^femei for anther, po'intell^ ovaw 
ior germ, and knob or buitofi ioxjl'igma: but thefe never made their 
way into the world, or became of general ufe. It is not neceffary 
therefore to difcufs the comparative merits of thefe terms with the 
Linnean ; fmce, after all, we muft fubmit to the fupreme law in 
thefe matters, general confent^^'": and when a Greek or Latin term 
has been once fan6tioned by ufe, there can be no doubt but that it 
ought to be preferred even to a term originally Englilh, which is 
either little known, or is applied to another fignification. 

It feems therefore upon the whole to be a defirable objecf, that 
all who talk or write of Botany in Englilh, fhould keep as clofe as 
poflible to the Linnean language : nor does it feem liable to any 
material objection, if we proceed with difcretion and propriety, 
without violating the rules of common fenfe or of grammar. 

For inflance, when there is a fignificant Englifh term, which has 
been in long and general ufe, it ought to be preferred. Thus it 
would be abfurd to put femen io\ feed^ qx folium for leaf: cell is pre- 
ferable to hculament, partition to dijfepinient^ and perhaps feed-vejfd to 
pericarp. Opinions will differ upon the extent to which this excep- 
tion to the general principle fhould be carried : but the original 
terms of the fcience in our language are fo few, that it may very well 
be confined within a fmall compafs. 

There are however cafes, in which it feems advifable rather to 
invent a new Englifh term, than to adopt the Linnean, Thus in 
the cafe of very long words, fuch as campaniformj ififundibulifonuy by- 
pQcrateriform^ and other fefquipedalian terms, which give too great an 
air of pedantry to the language, it will perhaps be thought better by 

* " Si volet ufus, 

** Quetn penes arbitrium eft, et jus, et norma loquendi," 

6 mod 



150 Profejfor Martyn'j Ohfervattom 

moft pcrfons to wizbell-fiaped^funnd-fiapedy ^n^ faher-Jhaped ) or bell- 
form, funnel-form, and faherform ; our Englifli tongue admitting 
compounds with great fuccefs and facility : efpecially fmce thefe 
terms convey immediately to the Englifh botanift a familiar idea of 
the feveral forms of the corolla, which they are intended to 
cxprefs. 

When words alfo have already an appropriate fenfe in Englifli, 
it feems better to tranflate them than to ufe the originals them- 
felves. Thus, although in Latin we fay caulh Jlrldlus or exafperatus, 
2ind folium exafperatum\ yet it has an abfurd found in Englifli to talk 
of 2ifridi or exafperated flalk, and of leaves being exafperated. On 
the contrary, it is ftill worfe, although it has not fo ridiculous a 
found, to drop the original Latin term, in order to adopt an Eng- 
lifli ono, before appropriated to another fenfe, and therefore only 
tending to create confufion. What I mean may be exemplified in 
the terms lanceolate ^iudferrale, applied to leaves : thefe are become 
fufficiently familiar by ufe; but if not, the explanation muft be re- 
ferred to : whereas, if we ufe the words lanced ?ind fawed, a novice 
might eafily be mifled ; for having been accuflomed to the ideas of 
a lanced gum and fawed wood, he will not readily apply the former 
to the fhape of a lance's head ; or the latter to the fliarp notching 
round the edge of a leaf, refembling the teeth of a faw. 

There are likewife fome Latin words which do not perfe6lly afll- 
milate to our language, and therefore are better tranflated. Such 
are teres and amplexicaulis^ Now we cannot well fay in Englifli tere 
or amplexicaul; but the firft may frequently be tranflated round: this 
however will fometimes create a confufion, and colwnnar gives the 
idea of teres moft: precifely ; for when applied to a fl:em, or any of 
its fubdivifions, it fignifies, not a cylindric, but a tapering form, like 
the fhaft of a column. The fecond of thefe terms may be rendered, 
fignificantly enough, embracing ox fiem-clafping, 

Thefe 



on the Language of Botany, 151 

Thefe and other exceptions, which will readily prefent them- 
felves to any one who confiders the lubje6l, being admitted ; the 
advantage of the fcience will be mod effectually confulted by re- 
taining the Linnean terms, whenever there is no cogent reafon to 
the contrary. It is frequently even dangerous to fubftitute equi- 
valent terms; or at leafl it requires the utmoft caution, if we would 
avoid confufion. Thus, if we tranflate the two Linnean terms deci- 
duus and caducus by the fame Englifh word falling y two diftinCl ideas 
are confounded"^: would it not therefore be better to ufe the two 
Latin terms, with an Englifh termination, deciduous and caduco^^j? 
Plumofus is rendered y^^^Z/^^ry; ^nd pinnatusy feathered: but is not this 
confounding ideas totally diftin6t? and are not therefore the terms 
plumous or rdJthtr: plumofe, and pinnated or Y2ith.Q.r: pinnate, to be pre- 
ferred? Dichotomus may be tranflatedy^r/^^^: but this Englilh term 
implying no more than one divifion into two parts, does by no 
means fully exprefs the idea of a ftem continually and regularly 
dividing in pairs from the bottom to the top. Surely then dichotomous t 
is preferable to forked. 

But where fhall we find Englifh words to exprefs all the varia- 
tions of pubefcence, which Linnasus has difcriminated with (o 
much nicety J ? Some of them indeed may very well admit of tranf- 

* Caducus fignifies a more quick or fudden falling oiFthan deciduu-s. The calyx of the 
Poppy dropping before the corolla is unfolded, is faid to be caducus. In Berberisy and many 
plants of the clafs Tetradynamiay it falls offi but not till after the corolla is expanded : the 
cahoc in this cafe is faid to be deciduus. 

f If XkQJus et norma loquendl would permit, I {hould be for rendering all Latin adje£bives 
ending in us^ by the Englifh termination ous; and all fuch as end in ofusy by the termiiia- 
tion ofe. 

X As fcabrttiesy lana, lanugo, villus, tomentum^ piliy feta, Jlrigay hamiy Jiimuliy aculeiy 
furceey fpinesy &c. and the adjectives derived from thefe and others ; as lanatuSy lamig'tnojuSy 
villofusy iomeniofusy pilofuSy Jetaceus, JirigofuSy hamatuSy acukatuSy furcatuSy fpinofus^ Jcaber^ 
hirtusy hirfutusy hifpiduSy exafperatusy Sec, 

lation; 



1^2 Profejfor Martyn'^ Obfervaitons 

lation*; but many will not. For inftance, if we xznditx f caber hy the 
Englifh word roughs how iTiall we diftinguifli it from afper^ which 
has the fame fignificatioA.? We are therefore reduced to the ne- 
ceflity of rendering afper^ rought; and of retaining mofl of the 
other Latin terms with Enghlh. terminations, as fcahroiis^ hirfute., 
hifpid^ Sec, unlefs we would wantonly load the fcience of Botany, 
and our EnglilTi tongue, with terms newly invented or applied, 
which are not either more fignificant, or more eafy to be underftood, 
than thofe which we are already in pofleflion o£ 

As to the fecond general principle, namely, that the terminations 
and plurals of our words, together with their compounds and de- 
rivatives, fhould be adapted to the flructure and genius of the 
Englilh language; it will not perhaps by many be thought of equal 
importance with the firfl:. There is perhaps no language that is 
more irregular than ours, or that admits of more licenfe in many 
refpecls. 

This however is no reafon why, in the formation of new terms, 
we fhould not follow- fuch fundamental rules as we have, avoid 
irregularities as much as poflible, and add no frelh barbarifms to 
thofe which already difgrace us. The well known Horatian rule J 
muft be our conftant guide in the formation of our terminations 
and plurals; and analogy muft be attended to in the firuilure of 
our compounds and derivatives. Thus nedfary m^y be ufed for 
nediarium, p'ljul for p'lJiiUiwi^ Jiyk iox Jlylus^ pericarp for pericarpium^ 
receptacle for receptaculum^ capfule for capfula^ glume for gluma^ culm 

* As Una wool, p'll't hzxx'Sffcta; brlftles, hami hook$^ Jlimuli flings, aculei prickles, fpina 
thorns : ianaius may be rendered woolly, pilcfus hairy, fetaccus briftly, Jmmatus hooked, 
^culcatus iprickly, fplnofus thorny. 
I If fo, in order to preferve the analogy, fxafperntus may be tranflated roughened, 
J " Et nova fa6taque nuper habebunt verba fidcm, fi 
" Graeco font* cadant, parce dctorta. 

for 



m th€ Language df Bxitatiy. jr'i 

for cukniis^ &c. Some of thelb words, as ficcfw'mm and perkarplum, 
arc become fo familiar to learned botanifts, that they will perhaps 
hardly be perfuaded to give up the Latin termination. The final 
in a may be admitted more readily; and corolla having ufe on its fide, 
will doubtlefs be preferred by many to corol^ which has not fo melo- 
dious a found. Naturalifts talk familiarly of a butterfly's antenna^ 
and cupola^ which in the laft century w^as confidered as a ftrano-er, 
is in this admitted to be a denizen. I muft obferve, however, that 
by changing the final a into c^ fome confufion will be avoided, 
which arifes from not diftinguifhing the Latin feminine fingular 
from the neuter plural; and by ufing Jiipule ioxjl'ipulay we lliall no 
longer hear of a leaf-ftalk or petiole having two Jlipul a. 

But whatever allowance may be made in fingular terminations, 
the plurals muft certainly follow the analogy of the Englilh tongue; 
and if we tolerate corolla and anthcray ?ie5larjum and pericarp'mm, we 
cannot poflfibly allow of corollas and anthene^ netiarla and pericarpia ; 
but we muft ufe either corollas or corolsy anthcras or anthers^ neclariums 
or nediarieSy pericarpiums or pericarps, according as we preferve the 
original term entire, or anglicize it. 

All derivatives and compounds ought to follow the analogy of 
the original words from which they are derived, or of which they 
are compounded. Thus from corolwt, regularly form corolleiy as from 
crown, coronet : if we adopt the terms prickle and thorny we muft ufe 
the adjedlives prickly and ihornv^ not aculeate zndfpinofe : from glume 
we form glumofe\ from amenty amentaceous ; from awn^ awned and 
aiiunlefs; from axil or axilla, axillary^ from pinna, pinnate^ bipinnate, &c. 
from calyx are foi'med calycle, calycled, calycine; from petal, anther, 
berry, we make the compounds five-pet ailed, anther-bearings berry- 
bearing, not bacciferous ; from cell, two-celled ; from leaf, two-leaved', 
ilQX^Jeed, two-feeded. 

Without, however, entering too much into the minutcncflcs of 

X this 



^54 



Prof ejjor Mart Y'i^'s Ohfervatlons^ ^c. 



this fubjetfl, fuffice it to remark, that when we admit terms of art 
or fcience to participate in the rights of citizens, they fhould put on 
our garb, and adopt our manners. If this rule had ahvays been ob- 
ferved, our language would not have been deformed with innume- 
rable barbarifms, which learned and unlearned ignorance have 
joined to introduce among us; and which nothing but the conftant 
habit of fpcaking or hearing them, can ever reconcile to our ears*. 
It would be eafy to add many more obfervations, but it is not 
my defign to cxhauH: the fubje^:. I have addreiled thefe curfory 
remarks to you, Sir, as being at the head of a fociety, one of whofe 
principal views is to promote Englilli Botany ; in hopes that fome 
member of the fociety, who has more leifure than myiclf, may turn 
his thoughts to the fubject, and handle it fo fully, that all of us 
who are engaged in the fame purfuit. may fpeak the fame language. 



I am, 



Park Profpeft, AVeHiminfter, 
October 5, 17&9. 



SIR, &c. 



THO. MARTYN. 



* Such are per- cent ^ per-annum, per -pounds and per-pojl; ipfo fuSlo^ mhiutia, clata^ errata, 
in -vacuo^ vice 'uerfa, plus ci rmnus^ vis inertite^ in equHibric, jct-d'eau., aqua fortis, aqua vlta^ 
i^nis fatiius, cateris paribus ; equivoque^ critique^ jc-ne-f^ai-quct, j^avoir-i>iV-re^outre^ et cetera^ 
et cetera.^ et cetera. — It (hould feem that the mercantile world, the learned world, and the 
fafhionable world, had formed a conrplracy to debale our llerJing Englilhby ill-made terms, 
affededlv introduced without the leail neceffity. 



XVI. Oh- 



{ r55 ) 



XVL Obfervations on the Genus of Begonia. By Jonas Dryander^ M. A, 
Libr. R, S. and Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Stockhoimy 

Fellow of the Linnean Society. 

Read November 3, 1789. 

THE Genus of Begonia was firft eflabliilied by Plumicr, and 
publillied in 1700 by Tournefort, in the Appendix to his 
Inftitutiones Rei Herbariae, three years before the Nov^a Plantarum 
Americanarum Genera of Plumier appeared. From Tournefort, 
Linnaeus introduced it in the firfh edition of his Genera Plantarum, 
among the Fragmenta, or fuch genera as were not fufficiently de- 
¦fcribed to be referred to their proper claffes; and in the fecond edi- 
tion it ftill remains in the Appendix: but in the fifth and fixth edi- 
tions he refers it to Polygamia Monoecia, though without any alte- 
ration in the defcription of the genus from that in the firft edi- 
tion. In the thirteenth edition of the Syftema VegetabiUum this 
genus firft found its proper place in the Linnean Syftem, which is, 
Monoecia Polyandria. 

Ludwig, in the firft edition of his Definttiones Plantarum (1737)5 
introduces it very impropeily in his fifth clafs, Plantae fiorc pcr- 
fe6lo fimplici regulari pentapetalo. But in the fecond edition 
(1747) he gives it in the Appendix, among Fragmenta varia; and 
Bochmer alfo in the third edition (1760) refers it to Plantcc dubi^c. 

X 2 Linnaius, 



'1^6 'Mr. DryanberV Ohfervathns ' - 

Linncens, in his Ordines Naturales, has ranged the Begonia in 
the fifth divifion of the twelfth order, Holoraceas, with Polygonum, 
Rumex, and others. Erxleben, in his Anfangsgriinde der Naturge- 
fchichte, has clafled it with nearly the fame plants in his forty-fe- 
cond order, called Vaginales; and Ruling, in his Ordines Naturales, 
has it in his thirty-third order, Polygona, which differs from Erx- 
leben's Vaginales only in fome of the genera referred to it. 

Adanfon, in his Families dcs Plantes, has joined it with a very 
different fct of plants, in his thirty-fecond family, which he calls 
Portulacae. ButJuiTieu, in his Genera Plantarum fecundum Ordines 
naturales difpofita, juft publiihed, has given it among Plantas 
incertaD fedis; and juflly fays, " Genus nulli vere affine."" 

When Plumier firfl determined the genus, he referred to it fix 
fpecies ; but the few words by which he diflinguifhed them, were 
not fuflicient, in the prefcnt ftatc of Botany, to difcriminate fpecies. 
Whence Linnceus, in his firfl edition of Species Plantarum, having 
then probably never feen a Begonia, joined all the fpecies of Plu- 
mier, and one of Sloane, under the name of Begonia obliqua ; and 
in the fecond edition he added two more fynonyms, one from Rum- 
phius, and one from Browne : fo that in fa6l Begonia obliqua con- 
tained, under one trivial name, all the fpecies at that time known; 
and it is no wonder that this vague name has been applied by dif- 
ferent botanifts to almoft any fpecies of Begonia which occurred to 
them. Chevalier Lamarck in the Di6tionnaire Encyclopedique, and 
M. Jacquin in the firfl volume of his Colle6lanea, \;ere the firfl 
who attempted to bring this confufed genus into fome order; but 
neither of them had feen more than one fpecies, and were obliged 
to make out the refl merely from books. 

A fpecies of Begonia, which flowered in Ocloberlafl year (1788) 
in Mr. Lee's garden at Hammerfmith, made it neceffary for me to 
(ludy the genus of Begonia, for the purpoie of determining that 

plant: 



en the Genus of Begonia, 1^7 

plant: and having an opportunity of comparing dried fpccimens of 
feveral fpecies, and the afliftance of defcriptions of fome of them 
made on the fpot by the late Do6lors Solander and Koenig, bcfides 
the knowledge to be got from printed books, I was tempted to lay 
before the Society the refult of my refcarches. Though I have iccn 
fpecimens of fifteen out of the twenty-one fpecies I have determined, 
flill many of them were not fo perfe6l in all their parts, as to enable 
me to give a fatisfactory account of them ; and the impofTibility of 
determining wdth certainty fuch flelliy plants from dry fpecimens, 
makes it flill more necefTary to offer this only as a fketch of the 
imperfe<St knowledge we have of this genus, in hopes of inciting 
fuch botanifts, as may hereafter have an opportunity of examining 
the living plants, to fill up the chafms which ftill remain. It muft 
alfo be left to a future confideration, when the different fpecies 
fhall be better known, if it would not be more convenient to di- 
vide this natural genus into feveral artificial ones; as it is almoft 
impofTible to give a general defcription of the genus, there being fo 
great a variation in the parts of fru6lification. 

Confcious of the impofTibility of making good figures from im- 
perfect dried fpecimens of fucculent plants, but ftill wilhing to give 
fome afTiflance to thofe who have no opportunity of feeing the fpe- 
cimens I have ufed, I have given the outline of a leaf of moft of 
the fpecies, which were not figured before; and alfo a figure of the 
fruit, when I had a perfect one. 

There ftill. remain feveral Begonias of which I have fome know- 
ledge, but not fufficient to introduce them in this arrangement of 
the genus : thofe will be found in an appendix at the end, under 
the title of Species obfcurae. 

It will be necefTary to explain fome terms made ufe of in my 
fpccific differences : 

5 Fohum 



138 Mr. Dryander'j Ohfer vat tons 

Folium inaqualiter cordaium, cujus alter lobus major. (Male cbli' 
quum di6lum, cum terminus hie diredlionem folii, non figu- 
ram, refpiciat.) 
YoX\\m\ fem'i cor datum ^z\{\\x% alter lobus obliteratus. 
Capfulx alcf paraHela, dum alae marge exterior lateri capfulse pa- 
. rallelus eft. 

Rotund aice^ cum medio latiores. 

Qhiufanguldc^ lupernc latiores, angulo rotundato. 

Acutangul^^ fuperne latiores, angulo acuto. 



BEGONIA. Tourn. Injl, 660. tab. 442. Lin. Gen. PL ed. i. ri. 901. 
cd. vi. n. 1 156. Liidw. Def. Gen. 1737. p. 49. 1747. n. 1044, 
1760. n. 1266. Adanf. Fanu p. 244. Lam. LncycL i. p. 393. 
Giertn. Sem, p. 156, tab. 31. Jujf. Gen. p. 436. 
(Dixit Plumier in memoriam D. Begon, Regi Gallias ab intimis 
confiliis et rei nauticae praefecSli in ora Santonum, cujus merita in 
rem herbariam me quidem latent.) 

* MafcuU Flores. 
Cal. nullus. 

CoR. Petala quatuor (in o^opetala 6 — 9): quorum duo cppofita 
majora, plerumque fubrotunda (m ferrugmea omnia fubas- 
qualia oblonga). 
St AM. Filamcnta numerofa (15 — 100), reccptaculo inferta, brevif- 
fima, interdum bafi coalita. AnthcrcE oblono-ae, ercclcC. 
'- Feminel Flores^ plerumque in eodem cum mafculis pedunculo 
communi. 
Cal. nullus. 

CoR. Petaia plurimis quinque, aliis (4, 7, 18, 19, 21) fex, aliis (8, 
16) forte quatuor, plerumque inaequalia. 

PiST. 



on the Genus of Begonia. irg 

PisT. Germen inferum, triquetrum, in plurimis alatum. Styll ple- 

rifque tres, bifidi. Stigmata fex. 
Per. Capfula plerifque triquetra, alata, trllocularis, bad fecus alas 

dehifcens; aliis (5, 6) bilocularis; aliis (4, 18) forte unilo- 

cularis. 

Charadfer EJJentialis. 

Masc. Calj'x nullus. Coro/Z^ poly petal a. Stamina numevoi^a.. 

Fem. Calyx nullus. Corolla polypetala, fupera. Capfula alata, poly- 

fperma. 

Habitus Generis. 
Tota planta carnofa. 

Caulis plerifque herbaceus, fed fpecies quaedam acaules. 

Folia petiolata, in caulefcentibus alterna, 

Stipulo' ad bafin petiolorum bins. 

Pedunculi plerifque dichotomi, in caulefcentibus axillares. 

Locus Natalis. 
Inter tropicos, in Afia et America. In Africas continente nulla fpe- 
cies hucufque inventa, fed in infulis adjacentibus tres. 

Species. 
I. Begonia nitiJa^ fruticofa ere6la, foliis glaberrimis inxqualiter 

cordatis obfolete dentatis, capfula; ala maxima fubrotunda. 
Begonia nitida. Hart. Kew. 'in. p. 352. 
Begonia obliqua. UHerit. Stirp. Nov, i. p. 95. tab. 46. (exclufis fy- 

nonymis plurimis). 
Begonia minor. Jacqu. Collet, i. p. 128. n. 3. defer, in p, 126*. 
Begonia purpurea. Swart% prodr. 86. 
Habitat in Jamaica. Gul. PFright. t? 

This elegant flirub, which is now a common ornament to our 
hot-houfes, was introduced here in the year 1777. 

* Icon. vol. ii. 

Dr. 



l6o Mr, DryanderV Obfervatkm 

Dr. Swartz informed me, by letter, that his B. purpurea is the- 
common garden Begonia ; but the fynonym of Browne, which he 
quotes, cannot well belong to thefe fpecies, as Browne's plant is 
fcandcnt. I do not know if Begonia rofeo florc, folio aurito, minor 
ct glabra, of Plumier (Begonia obliqua /3. L'inn» Sp. PL), which Jac- 
qiiin and Swartz refer to this fpecies, belongs to it; as it is impofii- 
blc from thefe few words to know what plant he meant, in a genus, 
where the fpecies are very difficult to diftinguilli from one another. 
Among a great many coUedlions of plants from different Weft In- 
dia iflands, which I have feen, I have never found B. nitida from 
any other ifland than Jamaica; and as Plumier had, as far as I 
know, not been in that ifland, I think it rather probable that he 
did not mean this fpecies: befides, the epithet of Minor is ill appli- 
cable to fo tall a flirub, and which has as large leaves as any in the 
genus, except macrophylla and grandls. 

However unwilling to change names, I could not adopt any of 
the trivial names given to this plant : obUqua is too vague, as Lin- 
naeus under the name of Begonia obliqua includes a great number 
of fpecies, and it is even uncertain whether this be one of them ; 
minor, as I have already remarked, applies ill to it; ?ind purpurea ftill 
lefs, as no part of it is of a purple colour. 

1. Begonia ifopiera, caulefcens, foliis glabris fcmicordatis obfoletc 
dentatis, capfulx alls fubasqualibus parallelis ^-. 

Habitat in Java. 

Of this we may foon expect a figure and defcription in Dr. 
Smith's Icones Plantarum, from a fpecimen in the younger Lin- 
nasus's Herbarium. 



* Sm'ih Ic. 43. 



3. Be- 



Linn.Traru.I. tab- li p .161. 



:^^K 




on the Genus of Begonia. l6i 

3. Begonia reniformh, caulefcens, foliis reniformibus angulatis den- 
tatls, capful^ ala maxima acutangula; reliquis parallelis mini- 
mis. Tab. 14. Fig. r, 2. 
Habitat in Brafilia, prope Rio de Janeiro, in rupium fifluris umbrofis. 

J of. Banks, 

Defcriptio D, Dodf, Solander, 

^* Cau/es carnofi, breves, craffitie digiti. 

" Folia alterna, petiolata, latiora quam longiora, fubreniformia, 
crenato-dentata, angulata: angulis 8 — 12, acutis, inaequalibus; bafi 
cordata, altero latere minore. 

*' Petioli longitudine diametri longitudinalis foliorum. 

" Pedunculus communis, fpithamasus, terminatus Cyma bis dicho- 
toma, dein tetrachotoma. Pediceili dein umbellati. 

" Floris mafcuii Petala qnatuor, ciaiciata, patcntia, alba: duo op- 
pofita majora, ovata, obtui'a, integerrima, in medio extus convexa ; 
reliqua dimidio minora, oblongo-lanceolata, acuta, parum carinata. 

" Filamenta circiter triginta, filiformia, brevia, fubasqualia, lutea. 
Anther <£ lineari-oblongae, filamentis longiores, longitudine peta- 
lorum minorum, eredtae, lutCce. 

'' Piflilluin omnino nullum. 

'' Floris feminei Petala quinque, oblonga, fubaequalia, patentia, 
parum concava, acutiufcula, alba. 

" Germen inferum, ovatum, triangulare: angulis membranaccis : 
membrana anguli exterioris majore. 5/);// tres, bipartiti, villormfculi. 
Stigmata fimplicia. 

^^Capfula ovata, trigona, angulis membranaccis duobus interioribus 
aequalibus, minoribus; membrana anguli exterioris maxima, fuperne 
in angulum acutum extenfa; trilocularis : locuhs cylindricis, bafi 
dehifcentibus. 

'' Semina numerofiflima, ovata, parva, receptaculo columnari crafTo 
affixa.'* 

y 4. Bego- 



1 62 Mr. DftYANDER'i Obfervaiions 

4. Begonia ermineay caulefcens, foliis cordatis acuminatis ferratis, 
' capful^e ala maxima falcata; reliquis obliteratis. 

Begonia erminea. U Merit, Stirp. Nov. i. p. 97. tab. 47* 

Habitat in Madagafcar : in infula Marofle intra finum Antongll, fu- 

pra lapides fecus rivulos. Jo. GuL Bruguiere, 

I know this fpecies only from Mr. L'Heritier's defcription and 
figure. 

5. Begonia crenata^ caulefcens, foliis inasqualiter cordatis fubro- 

tundis obtufis crenato-dentatis, capfulis bilocularibus. Tab. 
14. Fig. 3. 
Habitat in Indian Orientalis infula Salfette, et prope Fort Victoria, 

in muris et rupibus. Ant. Pantakon Hove. 

" Flores pallide rubri.** Hove. 

Floris mafculi petala quatuor, quorum duo oppofita anguftiora, 
vix breviora. Floris feminei petala quinque, quorum tria an- 
guftiora. Stylus unicus. FruSfus hujus et fequentis fpeciei immatu- 
ros tantum vidi, eofque male ficcatos, nt de figura alarum incer- 
tus fim. 

In Sir Jofeph Banks's Herbarium, are fpecimens colledled by Mr. 
Hove in i:he above-mentioned places. 

6. Begonia temiifoUa, caulefcens, foliis in^qualiter cordatis ovatis 

acutis angulatis obfolete dentatis, capfulis bilocularibus. Tab. 
14. Fig. 4. 
Habitat m Pulo Pontangh, f. Prince's Ifland, prope Javam. J of. 
Banks. 

Defcriptio D. Bodl. Solander. 

" Floris mafculi Corolla tetrapetala, compreffa, ex albido-incar- 

nata, ftriis rubris ornata. Petala per paria oppofita : duo exteriora 

ovato-fubrotunda, obtufa, bafi panim cordata, diametro tri- vei 

6 quadri- 



on the Genus of Begonia. 163 

quadrilineari ; duo interiora dimidio minora, ovato-oblonga, obtu- 
fiufcula. 

" FUamenta numcrofiflima (lOo), receptaculo inconulum elevate 
inferta, brevia. Anther^e ovatae, ere6lae, luteae. 

'^ Pijiilhim nullum. 

" Floris feminei Petala quinque, colore ut in mare, figura exterio- 
rum maris: intimum reliquis minus. 
' *' Stamina nulla. 

*' Germen incarnatum. Styli tres, glabri.'* 

7. Begonia y^rr«^/w/?, caulefcens, folils inaequaliter cordatis den- 

tatis, floris mafculi petalis oblongls fubsequalibus*. 
Begonia ferruginea. Linn. SuppL 419 (defer. Mutis). Lamarck En* 

cycl. i. p. 395. n. 9. Jacqu. Collet, i. p. 128. n. i. 
Habitat in Nova Grenada. Jof, Celeji, Mutis. 

In the Linnean Herbarium is a leaf and fame male flowers of 
this fpecies ; from which, together with the drawing of it by Dr. 
Mutis, Dr. Smith will give a figure in his next Fafciculus. 

It is eafily diflinguillied from all other fpecies which I know, by 
the long and narrow petals of the male flowers, all of the fame 
breadth, and very little difi*ering in length. 

8. Begonia grandis, caulefcens, foliis inaequaliter cordatis angulatis 

ferratis, capfulae alis parum insequalibus. 
Begonia obliqua. "Thunb. Japon. 231. defer, /c. Kjempfer, tab. 20. 
Sjukaido. Kampf. Amctn, 888. 
Habitat in Japonia. Engeib. Kampfer^ Car, Petr, Thunberg* 

The male flowers alone are defcribed by Dr. Thunberg, in his 
Flora Japonica ; and by Kaempfer, in his manufcripts preferved in 

* Smith Ic. 44. 

Y 2 the 



164 -"vIr* Dryander'j Obfervatlons 

the Biitilh Mufeum (Sloan. MSS. 2915, p. 202) ; and the fpeci- 
men in the Linnean Herbarium has only male flowers : fo that the 
only knowledge I have of the female flowers is from Kasmpfer's 
figure, in which the wings of the germen in feveral inflances have 
an acute angle, bat in others are rounded; for which reafon I have 
avoided mentioning the fhape of the wings, in the differentia fpe- 
cifica. 

Dr. Thunberg fuppofes this plant to be dioicous, but the figure 
of Ksempfer has male and female flowers in the fame panicle. This 
feeming contradi6lion may be reconciled by an obfervation I lately 
made. I wanted to examine the female flowers of Begonia nitida, 
and looked for them on plants in full flower, both at Kew and in the 
Marchioncfs of Rockingham's garden at Hillingdon ; but could find 
nothing but male flowers, though it is very well known that the 
B. nitida is monoicous. This circumflance is not peculiar to Begonias, 
as I have feen a large cedar-tree for feveral years full of male catkins, 
without a Angle female one. Mr. L'Heritieralfo informed me that the 
female flowers are very rarely to be met with in Aiianthus glandu- 
lofa ; and I have not yet been able to find any one in a large tree at 
Kew, which flowers very freely. 

This fpecies, and the following, macrophylla, have by far the 
largeft leaves of any in the genus j but this has twice as large 
flowers as macrophylla. 

9. Begonia macrophylla^ caulefcens, foliis inasqualiter cordatis cre- 

nato-dentatis : inferioribus angulatis, capfulas alis obtufan- 

guhs : una maxima. 

Begonia macrophylla. Lamarck EncycL i. p. 394, n. 6. defer, ex 

nanufcr. Plum. ^^ JL 

Begonia grandifolia. "jactiu, CoIIcSi. i, p. 128, n. 2 (exclufo fyno- 

nymoBrownei), 

Begonia 



on the Genus of Begonia. 165 

Begonia purpurea et nivea maxima, folio aurito. Plum, Ic, 34, tab» 

45» fig- 1- 
Habitat in infulis Indiae Occidentalis. Car. Plumier^ Job. Ryan, 

, Henr. de Ponthicu, Alex. Anderfon. 

^.'This fpecics is both in Sir Jofeph Banks's and the younger Lin- 
nasus's Herbarium. A fpecimen in the former Herbarium has, in the 
axilla of the lower leaf, a panicula confifting entirely of female 
flowers; and, from the axilla of the leaf above, a panicula of male 
flowers* ., .,.-,. 

10. Begonia acutifoUa^ caulefcens, foliis femicordatis angulatis den- 

tatis, capfula; ala maxima obtufangula j reliquis acutangulis. 
Begonia acutifolia. Jacqu. Collet, L/p, 12S, n. 4 (excluio fyno- 

nymo Plumieri). 
Aceris fru6lu herba anoniala, fiore tetrapetalo albo. Sloan. Jam, 

tab. 127, .fig. J, 2. 
Habitat in Jamaica. Hans Shane, Franc. Majfon. 

Sir Hans Sloane's defcription, in his Hiflory, vol. i. p. 199, agrees 
fo ill with his figure and his fpecimens in the Britifh Mufeum 
(Hortus Siccus, vol. iii. fol. 121), which I have compared with the 
fpecimens in Sir Jofeph Banks's Herbarium, that I am rather in- 
clined to believe, that he, confounding feveral fpecies, has defcribed 
one and figured another. The leaves ai'e longer and narrower than 
he defcribes them, and not at all rough; having fo very few 
hairsj that they might be called fmooth. The fpecimens I have feen 
have no appearance of being from a creeping plant; they are all in 
fruit, and have no flowers. 

This fpecies comes very near to the following, but differs in the 

fmoothnefs already mentioned, and in having longer footflalks, the. 

length of one third or one fourth of the leaf; which, on the con-' 

trary, are fo fhort in B. acuminata, as not to equal the angle of the 

leaf, which extends beyond the infertion of the footftalk. 

ir* Be- 



l66 Mr. Dryander'j Obfervations 

IT. Begonia acuminata,^ caulefceijs, foliis hifpidis femicordatis acu-' 
minatis inaequaliter dentatis, capfulx ala maxima obtufangula; 
relicjuis acutangulis. Tab. 14, Fig. 5, 6. 
Habitat in Jamaican montibus caeruleis. Jul, von Rohr, Gul. Wright, 
Floris mafculi Petala quatuor, quorum duo oppofita minora. Floris 
femlnci Petala quinque, quorum duo minora. Ad bafm germinis 
bradlea duse, argute ferratae, germine dimidio breviores. 
Specimens are in the Herbarium of Sir Jofeph Banks *. 

12. Begonia humilis^ caulefcens eredla, foliis hifpidis femicordatis 
duplicato-ferratis, capfulas alis rotund atis parum inasqualibus. 
Hort. Kew. iii. p. 353. Tab. 15. 

Habitat in Indice Occidentahs, infula Trinidad. Alex. Anderfoft, 

Defcrlptlo, \ '" 

Tota planta carnofa, pellucida. CauIIs, petioli et pedunculi pallide 
rubentes. Caul/s teres, geniculis tumidis, primo anno fpitham^EUS, 
altero anno bipedalis. Folia femicordata, acuminata, duplicato- 
ferrata: ferraturis ciliatis; fupra faturate viridia, hifpida e ftrigis 
mollibus, erc6lis, bafi tuberculatis ; fubtus pallide viridia, glaber-' 
rima praeter ftrigas rariores in venis, quales etiam in petiolis. 
Stipule femiovat^, concavse, ciliatse, hyalinse. PeduncuU axillares, 
faepius dichotomi. BraBea ad bafm pedicellorum ovata, ciliata, 
minuta, Floris mafculi Petala alba : duo cordato-orbiculata, magna ; 
duo minima, qus in quibufdam floribus omnino defunt. Fila- 
menta circiter 15, breviflima. Anther a oblongas, luteas. Floris fe- 
minei Petala quinque, alba, perfiftentia, obovato-oblonga : duo 
paulo anguftiora. Germen trigonum, angulis acutis, alis rotundatis 
parum inaequalibus, pallide carneis. i*/)'// tres, breviflimi. Stigmata 
bipartita : lacinix divaricata:, dein convergentes, et iterum diver- 
gentes, luteae, te6tae glandulis minimis. Capfula figura germinis. 

* This fpecles has been introduced into the Royal Garden at Kew fince the reading of 
this Paper. 

When 



Linn Trofts . f. tab . Jo .jr>.766 




Q_LAj&^;x>n ^^i A// ^^ ?///,:> 



on the Genus of Begonia. 167 

When this plant firft flowered in Mr. Lee's garden at Hamir.er- 
fmith, in 06lober lad year (1788), it was fuppofed to be annual, 
having produced flowers and fruits in a few months from its being 
fown. It was then very low, as appears from the annexed figure, 
reprefenting a whole plant ; and, fuppofmg it to be then at its full 
height, I gave it the trivial name of bumi/is, in the Hortus iCew- 
enfis. But it has flnce flood over the winter, and grown much 
taller. 

13. Begonia hirfuta, caulefcens, foliis hifpidis femicordatis dupli- 

cato-ferratis, capfulae ala maxima obtufangula ; reliquis paral- 
lelis minimis. 
Begonia hirfuta. Aubl, Gutan. 913, tab. 348. Lamarck Encycl. i. 

P* 393? "• 3" J^cqu, Collet, i. p. 129, n. 8 (exclufo fynonymo Plu- 

mieri). 
Habitat in Guianse rupibus. Fufee Aublet. 

The fpecimen in Sir Jofeph Banks's Herbarium from Aublet is 
without fructification, fo that my knowledge of the fruit is only 
from Aublet's figure. But it muft be obferved that the figures in 
his work are mude at Paris from dry fpecimens, as appears from the 
original drawings in Sir Jofeph Banks's library. In comparing them 
with the fpecimens in his own Herbarium, now in the pofleflion of 
Sir Jofeph Banks, I have feveral times had occafion to obferve that 
they are not very faithful ; and, in the inftance of the two fpecies of 
this genus figured there, the outline of the leaves is quite wrong: 
whence my fpecific differences, made from the fpecimens, will not be 
found to agree with his figures. 

14. Begonia Urtic^, caulefcens radicans, foliis utrinque hifpidis 

inasqualiter ovatis duplicato-ferratis, capfulis bafi tricor- 
nibus. 

Begonia 



i68 Mr. DryanderV Obfervatians 

Begonia Urtic^e. Linn. Suppl. 420. defer. Lamarck Encycl i. p. 394, 

n. 8. Jacqu. Collet, i. p. 129, n. 7*. '¦ 

Habitat m America. Jof. Celejl. Mutts, 

Dr. Smith will give a figure of this from a complete fpecimen in 
the Linnean Herbarium. -^ \ ..,.., 

15. Begoi^ia fcandens, fcandens radicans, foHis ovato-fubrotundis 

obfolete dentatis, capfula: ala maxima obtufangula ; reliquis 
parallelis minimis. 
Begonia fcandens. Swartz. Prodr. 86 (exclufo fynonymo Plu- 

mieri). ..: :j..,.t, .....i.w,u. .,... u...h.>. 

Begonia glabra. Aubl. Guian, 916, tab. 349. Lamarck EncycL i. 

p. 394, n. 4. jfacqu. Cblledl, i. p. 129, n. 5. 
Habitat in Guiana, Fufce Auhkt : in Jamaica, Gul. Wright, Rog. 

Shake/pear^ 01. Swart%. 

I have adopted Dr. Swartz's trivial name in preference to Aublet's, 
becaufe the leaves are not quite without hairs. >, ; . ,, .; - , \ 

In Sir Jofeph Banks's Herbarium are fpecimens both from Guiana 
and Jamaica. 

16. Begonia iuberofjy repens, foliis insequaliter cordatis angulatis 

dentatis, capfulse alis parallelis. 
Begonia tuberofa. Lamarck EncycL i. p. 393, n. i. 
Empetrum acetofum. Rumph. Amb. v. p. 457, tab. 169, fig. 2. 
Habitat in faxofis infularum Amboinae, Molucca:, et Celebes. Ge. 

Ever. Rumphius. 

I know this plant only from Rumphius's figure and defcription. 
Chevalier Lamarck has joined it with the Begonia capenfis of Lin- 
nsEus's Supplement ; but the capfules of that fpecies have only two 
winged corners, one wing being very large : and there is every rea- 

* Begonia urticaefolia. Smith h. 45. 

' ^ fon 



LinnTmnf.I. tnb.lS.p .160. 




'(J e^(^o7t^a. 



S-^- 



^^?erti 



Jl^trAc 



rJti n ~^/^ f-f/: 



on the Genus of Begonia, 169 

fon to fuppofe, from the figure and defcription of Rumphius, that 
B. tuberofa has all the wings of the fame fize, like the B. ifop- 
tera. 

17. Begonia rotundifoUa^ repens, foliis reniformi-fubrotundis cre- 

natis. 
Begonia rotundifolia. Lamarck EncycL i. p. 394, n. 7. 
Begonia obliqua S". Sp, PL 1498. 
Begonia rofeo flore, folio orbiculari. Tourn. Injl. p. 660. Plum, 

Cat, PL Amer. p. 20, ic. 33, tab. 45. 
Habitat in India occidcntali. Car. Plurnier. 

1 have not feen any fpecimen of this. 

18. Begonia nana, acaulis, foliis lanceolatis, fcapo fubbifloro. 
Begonia nana. VHerit, Siirp, Nov. i. p. 99, tab. 48. 

Habitat in Madagafcar : in infula MaroiTe intra finum Antongil, in 
lapidibus et truncis arborum. Jo. Gul. Bruguiere. 
1 have taken up this fpecies only from Mr. L'Heritier's defcrip- 
tion and figure. 

19. Begonia tenera, acaulis, foliis iuGequaliter cordatis, floribus um- 

bellatis. Tab. 16. 
Falkea tenera. Keen. Manufcr. (in BibL Banks.) vol, xvii. pag. 227. 
Habitat in Zeylona. Joh, Gerh. Kcenig. 

Defcriptio D. D. Kcenig. 
** Folia omnia radicalia, orbiculato-cordata, acuta, insequaliter den- 
tata, merabranacea, tenera, fupra fibrillis bafi glandulofis, albis, 
pellucidis confperfa; fubtus fibrillis rarioribus prazfertim ad venas 
adfperfa. Petioli teretes, ere6tiufculi, glabri, adfperfi fibrillis rari- 
oribus, rubri, foliis longiores, faspe pcdales, crafi^itie penna anfe- 
rina anguftiores. Scapi ere6li, teretes, losves, fibrillis adfperfi, car- 

Z nofi, 



1 70 Mr. Dryander'j Obfervatlom 

nofi, petiolis tenuiores et breviores. Stipule radicales, ovat^, acu- 
minat:^, concavse, dorfb carinatse, carnofas, albicantes, marcef- 
centes, femunciales. Flores umbellati, mafculis numerofis, femi- 
neis paucis. Umbellcs interdum compofitas. BraSlea ad bafin pe- 
dicellorum lanceolatae, parvas, caducae. Pedicelli teretes, Iseves, 
iibrillis adfperfi, parum colorati, flore longiores. Floris mafculi 
Peiala quatuor, nivea : iluo exterlora cordato-orbiculata, extus 
fibrillis confperfa, intns glabra, nervis obioletis notata, ante flo- 
refcentiam invicem adprefla, plana, fub anthefi patentia ; Petala 
duo interior a^ cum exterioribus alternantia, ovata, acuta, utrinque 
glabra, exterioribus duas tertias minora. Filamenta bafi connata, 
numerofa (50), capillacea, glabra, albicanti-viridia. Anthera ere6lse, 
clavatas, filamentis longiores, petalis interioribus breviores, lutese. 
Florh fem'tnei Petala fex, quorum tria exteriora, tria interiora, a 
mafculis non nifi numero diverfa. Germen clavatum, triquetrum, 
ad angulos alatum, fibrillis adfperfum. Siyli tres, ere6liufculi, cla- 
vati, glabri, lutefcentes, petalis minoribus parum breviores. Stig^ 
mata reniformiter curvata, apicibus craflioribus, pilis aureo-luteis 
tenuiflimis prsefertim ad apices obdu6la. Capfula turbinata, tri- 
quetra, alata, trilocularis. Recepiaculum feminum membranaceo- 
trialatum. Semina utrinque ad alas adnata, numerofa, globofa, 
minima." 
Dr. Koenig quotes as fynonym Soneri-ila Rheed. MaL ix, p. 127, 

tab. 65 ; but the plant there figured has tripetalous hermaphrodite 

flowers, with three flamens and one ftyle. 

The annexed figure is from a dry fpecimen in Sir Jofeph Banks*s 

Herbarium. 

20. Begonia diptera, acauhs, foliis inaequaliter cordatis, pedunculis 
dichotomis, c.apfulx ala una maxima ; altera angufla ; tertia 
obfoleta. 
6 Begonia 



on the Genus of Begonia, 171 

Begonia capenfis. Linn. Suppl, 420. Jacqu, Collet, i. p. 130, n. 9. 
Begonisc fpecies capenfis. Linn, Mant. 502. defer. Koenig. 
Habitat in infulse Joannas umbrofis, ad latera montium. Job, Gerb, 

Kcenig. 

The account of the capfnles given in the above differentia fpe- 
cifica, is taken from the manufcript defcription fent by Dr. Koenig 
to Linnseus, now in the polTeflion of Dr. Smith. 

21. "Begohi A o^opeia/a, acaulis, foliis Cordatis quinquelobis, pedun- 

cuhs dichotomis. 
Begonia o6lopetala. UHerit. Stirp. Nov, i, p. loi. 
Habitat in montibus Limx. Jof. Domhey, 

Of this I have neither feen fpecimen nor figure. 

Species Obscur.«. 

1. Begonia malaharica^ cauhbus herbaceis, peduncuhs axillaribus brc* 
vibus fubtrifloris, fru6libus baccatis. Lamarck EncjcL i. p. 393, 
n. 2. 

Begonia malabarica^ caule ere6to, fohis obfolete dentatis fubtus hir* 

futis, peduncuhs fubtrifloris. Jacqu. CoUedi, i. p. 129, n. 6. 
Tsjeria-narinampuh. Rheed. Mai. ix. p. 167, tab. 86. 

No other fpecies of Begonia being hitherto known, whofe fe- 
male flowers have only three petals, it requires the confirmation of 
modern botanifts before one can truft to the authority of the 
Hortus Malabaricus for fo Angular a circumflance. I have feen 
feveral male flowers of Begonia humilis with only two petals, and 
why may not a fimilar monflroflty happen in female flowers ? 

2. Acetofa Nigritarum feu Indorum Lingat. Kamel Stirp. Luzon. 
(in Rail Hiji, vol. iii.) p. 14, n. 24. Icon in Muf. Britann, Manufc. 
Sloan. 4J080, fig. 109. 

Z 2 This 



172 Mr. DRYANDER'i Obfervatlons 

This comes very near to the B. malabarica, fo far as one can 
judge from the rude figure of Father Kamel *. 

3. In a volume of drawings in Sir Jofeph Banks's library, made 
at Canton by a Ghinefe, who had been inftru6led by the late Mr. 
Blake in the art of making botanical drawings, is a figure of a Be- 
gonia, under the name of 1'fou Hoy T^ong^ which is related to 
grandis, but differs in the leaves not being angulated, and the mar- 
gin being equally ferrated. As only male flowers are reprefented 
in the drawing, it is impoffible to determine itt. 

4. Begonia repens, caulibus repentibus ad nodos radicofis, foliis 
uniauritis, pedunculis axillaribus longis multifloris. Lamarck 
Encycl. i, p. 394, n. 5. 

Begonia obliqua y, Sp. PL 1498. 

Begonia rofeo flore, folio aurito minor et hirfuta. I'ourn, Injl, 660. 

Plum, Cat. PL Amer, 20, ic. 34, tab. 45, fig. 2. 

Chevalier Lamarck defcribes this with white flowers, which, ac- 
cording to Plumier's name, fhould be pink. He adds as a variety 
B. rofeo flore, folio aurito minor et glabra; and adds, ic. 45, f. 3: but 
that figure belongs to B. rofeo flore, foliis acutioribus, auritis et 
late crenatis. 

5. Begonia rofeo flore, folio aurito minor et glabra. Tourn, Inji, 
660. Plum, Cat, PL Amer, 20. 

Begonia obliqua (6, Sp. PL 1498 (exclufo fynonymo iconum 

Plumieri). 

I have before fpoken of the uncertainty of tliis fpecics, referred to 
B. nitida by Jacquin and Swartz. 

* In this manner he figns his name to his letters to Petiver, preferved in the Britini 
Mufeum, Sloan. MSS. 4081. The plant named from him taught therefore to be called 
Ka7neiia inftead of Camellia. 

-jv Tfieou-hai-tang. Mem. fur les Chinois par les Mijftonnaires de Pe-Kin, iii. p. 443. 
Autumnal Hai-tang, Grafter Defct, ofChinCf i, p. 503. 

6. Be- 



on the Genus of Begonia, - 173 

6r Begonia rofeo flore, folils acutioribus, auritis et late crenatis. 
Tourn. Inft. 660. Plum, Cat, PL Amer, 20, k, 34, tab. 45, fig. 3. 
Begonia obliqua g. Sp, PI, 1498. 

7. Rumex fylveftris fcandens, foliis cordato-angulatis ab altera 
parte majoribus. Browne Jam, 203. 

8. Totoncaxoxo coyollin. Hern, Mexic, 195. 

9. Begonia obliqua. Gartn, Sem, p, 156, tab. 31. 



XVII. On 



( 174 ) 



XVII. On the Genus of Symplocos^ comprehenSng Hopea^ Alftonla^ and 
Cipontma. By Mr. Charles Louis UHerttm'y of the Academy of Sciences 
at Parisf Foreign Member of the Linnean Society, 

* Read January 5 , 1 790 , 

QUATUOR ilia genera in unum compIe£li fub nomine Sym- 
plocos planum mihi eft. Utinamde clafTe necnon de fpeciebus 
non minus certe pronuntiare poflim ! 

Charadteres tarn eflentialem quam naturalem primum exponam. 

S Y M P I. O G O S. 

Character ejfentialis. 

Calyx fuperus, quinquepartitus. Petala 5 — 10, bafi coalita, 
Ordines plures filamentorum corollae adnati. Germen inferum. 
Drupa nuce tri-quinqueloculari. 

Charadier naturalis, 

Cal. Perianthium fuperum, campanulatum, quinquepartitum : 
laciniis fubrotundo-ovatis, concavis, villofis, perfiftentibus. 

Cor. quafi monopetala, campanulata, calyce longior, receptaculo 
inferta: petalis f. laciniis 5 — 10, ovatis, integerrimis, re- 
flexis, bafi in tubum Jongitudine Calycis coalitis, fimul 
deciduis. 

Stam. 



Mr. L'Heritier'j Account^ &c. 175 

St AM. filamenta numerofa, fubmonadelpha, f. bafi inaequaliter 
connexa, linearia, plana, ere6la, tubo corolla adnexa 
vixque breviora, in plures ordines imbrlcata; exterioribus 
fenfim longioribus latioribufque. Anthero^ fubrotundsE, 
biloculares, ere6l3e. 
Pi ST. Germen inferum, turbinatum, apice fubemerfum. Stylus fili- 
formis, longitudine flaminum. Stigma capitatum, lubquin- 
quelobum. 
Per. Drupa oblonga, oleseformis, unilocularis, calyce coronata. 
Sem, Nux ejufdem formae, ftriata, tri-quinquelocularis : nucleis 
teretibus, oblongis. 
Car. LinnsEUs nomine primus Hopeam et Symplocon inter Poly- 
adelphas, Aubletius Ciponimam et Linnseus lecundus Allloniam 
in Polyandria, collocavere. E characSleribus genuinis fupra dedu6tis 
patet has omnes ad Monadelphiam et in unum genus revocandas 
efle. Symplocos, utpote antiquius, erit nomen genericum. Locum 
ordinis vindicat Symplocos hinc inter Gordoniam .et Camelliam qui- 
bus germen eft fuperum, inde inter Guftaviam et Carolineam qux 
gaudent germine infero. 

Species. 
Martinicensis. S. pedunculis fubracemo/is, foliis glaberrimis cre- 

nulatis. 
S. martinicenfis. Linn.Sp.Pl.^^:]. Jacq.jIm.idGy 

t. 175, f. 68. 
Habitat in Antillis. h 
CiPONiMA. S. pedunculis multifloris, foliis integris fubtus 

villofis. 
Ciponima guyanenfis. Aubl. Guy an. 567, tab. 226. 
Habitat in Guiana. Aublet. Patris. h 

Turiones admodum villofi. Folia fubtas plus 
minufve villofa, fsepifllme integra, raro laxiflime 
denticulata. Nuces quinqueloculares. 

Arechea, 



176 Mr. L'Heritiek's j^ccount, &c. / ' 

Arechea. S. pedunculis fubquinquefloris, foliis ferratis nudiuf- 
culis. 
Arechea vulgo. 

Habitat in fylvis Peruse. Bombey. h 
S. Arechea intermedia eft S.martinicenfis et Ciponimse, 
v' Tres forte funt varietates ejufdem plants. Atten- 

dant Autoptse. 
T INC TOR I A. S. floribus confertis fefliUbus, foUis glaucinis. 
Hopea tindoria. Lm«. Mant, 105. 
Arbor lauri foho, floribus in foUorum alis. Catejb, 

Car. i. 54. 
Habitat in Carolina. Frafer, h 
Alston I A. S. floribus fubdecapetalis feflTiUbus fubternis. 
Alftonia thearFormis. Linn. Suppl. 264. 
Habitat in America meridionah. Mutis. h 
Dr. Olaus Swartz Symplocon o6topetalam "^ nuper in Jamaica 
legebat, fed defcriptio inventori rehnquenda efl. 

Calyx Alftonice imbricatus refcrt bracleas Symplocos, quas pro 
calyce exteriori habere licet. Corollam monopetalam in Alftonia 
dicebat Linnaeus fecundus, quia revera talis apparet in Symploco. 
Limbus o6to-decem partitus in Alfl:onia. Symplocos Swartzii eft 
quoque o6lopetala. Filamenta Alfl:oni3£ tubo inferta, imbricata, ex- 
teriora longiora, graphice reprefentant ftamina Symplocos in plures 
ordines imbricatos, quorum interni breviores, difpofita. Germen fu- 
perum in Alftonia addit Linnseus fecundus, quia fru6lu ignoto tale 
diceres germen in Symploco, et tale habuere Jacquinus et Linnseus 
primus. De pofitione germinis in Ciponima Aubletius nihil habet. 

? Nuperrime banc evulgavit Swartz in fuo Prodromo Plantarum Indiae Occidentalis. 
Reponenda itaque inter congeneres pro fexta Symplocos fpecie: 
OcTOPETALA, S. floribus o6lopetalis. S-wart-z. Prodr. 109. 
Habitat in Jamaica. Swartz. Tj 

XVIII. On 



( 177 ) 



XVIII. On the Genus of Calltgonum, comprehend'mg Pterococcus and Pal- 
lajia. By Mr. Charles Louis h^Herltkr^ of the Academy of Sciences of 
Paris, Foreign Member of the Linnean Society, 

Read January 5 , 1 790. 

TOURNEFORTIUS percgrinator orientalis celeberrimus 
arbufculam Polygono et Atraphaxi proximam detexerat in 
Armenia, cujus defcriptionem et iconem in fuo Itinere Orientali 
evulgavit fub nomine Polygonoides Qricntale Ephedras facie, Tourn, 
It, ii. 356. 

Linnaeus ex eadem Polygonoide a Gronovio accepta genus Galli- 
goni ftabilivit. 

Hifce temporibus alteram ejufdem generis fpeciem indefertis Mari 
Cafpio vicinis legit celeb. Pallas ; kd nee Polygonoidi Tournefortii 
ntc Calligono JLinnsei attendens, pro novo genere novam banc 
Calligoni fpeciem propofuit in tomo fecundo Itineris, ubi defcrip- 
tionem et iconem videre licet fub nomine Pterococci aphylli (pag. 738, 
t. v.). Mox ipfe Pallafius huic errori alterum errorem in tomo 
tertio Itineris (pag. 536.) fubjecit, ubi afferit fuum Pterococcum effe 
Polygonoidem Tournefortii. 

Car. Linne nomine fecundus iterum plantam Pallafii quafi no- 
vum genus confecrare tentavit, Pallafio inventori coastaneo prasclare 
merito de re botanica dicavit, nuncupavitque Pallafam cafpicam in 
fuo Plantarum Supplemento. Ivit itaque inter botanicos et hortu- 

A a lanos, 



178 Mr. L'Heritier'j- Account of 

lanos, Calligono fere ignoto, fama Pallafise. Liceat tandem Calli- 
goniim contumeliofae oblivioni eximere. 

Calligonum in herbario Linnasano defideratur; fed Polygonoides 
quam vidi in herbario Tournefortiano, etfi Pallafise herba et flore 
fimillima, fru<5i:u admodum difcrepat. 

Tandem fatendum eft nonnuUos irrepfifle errores in icone Tour- 
nefortiana, multa qnoque defiderari in chara6lere generico Lin- 
nsano. Exempli gratia, Tournefortius depingit ftylum unicum 
dum 3 vel 4; (lamina panca dum circiter quindecim. Denique ex 
eadem icone crederes calycem et corollam fimul exftare, facile de- 
ceptus difco viridi foliolorum calycinorum ita mifere expreffo ut 
quafi perianthium exhibeatur in Tournefortio, dum corolla nulla, 
Linnaeus fligmata duo abfque ftylo Calligono allignat, dum ftyli 
tres vel fsepius quatuor et totidem fligmata ; numerum ftaminum 
non prefixit ; nee fru6lum graph ice defcribit. 

Pauca quoque emendanda funt in optima Pallafii defcriptione. 
In Pterococco yo//iz omnino nulla dicit Pallafius, fed revera adfunt in 
turionibus plantae nunc in meo horto floriferae et fru^liferae. Tour- 
nefortius, qui in Polygonoide depingit folia, forte tamen habuerat ^^ 
pro nafcentibus ramulis proliferis, articulatifque mox evafuris; dum 
ifta folia funt caduca. 

Nunc noflris et antecefTorum obfervatis fretus, Calligonum eluci- 
dare et firmare jam aggredior. 



* D'ou naifTent au lieu dc feuilles des brins cylindriques, epais de demic-Iigne, verd de 
m€r, longs d'un pouce ou 15 lignes, compofes de plufieurs pieces articulees bout a bout, 
fi femblables aux feuilles de I'Ephedra qu'il n'eft pas poffible de les diftinguer fans voir les 
fleurs, Tourn. Voyag. ii. 356. 



CAL- 



the Genus of CalUgonum, 179 

CALLIGONUM. 

Chara£fer ejfentialis. 

Cal. quinquepartitus. Cor. nulla. Filamenta circiter 16, bafi 
fubcoalita. Germen fuperum, tetraedrum. Styli 4. Nux 
crufla polyptera S. polychaetl, unilocularis. 

CharaSler naturalls. 
Cal. Perianthlum monophyllum, bad turbinatum, limbo quinque- 
partitum : laciniis fubcequalibus, fubrotnndis, patentibus, 
demuin obfolete reflexis, perfiftentibas, duabus exterioribus 
paulo minoribus. 
Cor. nulla (nifi calycem dicas). 

Stam. Filamenta circiter 16, divergentia, capillaria, inferne fub- 
incraflata pubefcentia, bafique leviter coalita germen 
ne£larii inflar ambientia, marcefcentia. Antherse fubro- 
tundae, biloculares, peltatce. 
Pi ST. Germen fuperum, ovatum, tetraedrum, acuminatum. Styli 
tres vel fa^pius 4, filiformes, patentes, bafi fubcoaliti feu 
defmentes in acumen germinis, filamentis vix breviores. 
Stigmata tot quot ftyli, capitata. 
Per. nullum (nifi crufla nucis). 

Sem. Nux corticata : cortice exfucco infeparabili ; oblonga, tetrae- 
dra, tetraptera, unilocularis, evalvis: alls nunc membrana- 
ceis longitudinaliter bipartitis dentatis crifpis, nunc fetofis* 
fetis ramofis rigidis moUibus: nucleo ejufdem formse. 

Species. 
POLYGONoiDES. C. frn6libus cancellatis, fetis ramofis rigidis. 
G. polygonoides. Linn. Spec. 748. 
Polygonoides orientale Ephedras facie, ^oum. 

Cor, 47, //. ii. p. 356, /. i^^6. 
Habitat in Armenia, 'Touniifort. ^ 

A a 2 coMo- 



l8o Mr. L'HERiTiER'i Account^ ^c\ 

coMosuM. C. fru6tibus cancellatis, fetis ramofis moUibus. 

Habitat in Mgy^to, Lippi: Barbaria, houiche Desfon- 
iaines. ^ 

Varietas forte prjccedentls. Plantse in omnibus fimil- 
limx, fed in planta Lippian^ fru6liis comofior fetis 
mollioribus, dum fetas difl:in6lifrimcE rigidiores in 
planta Tournefortiana cujus unicum vidi fru6lum. 
Pall ASIA. * G. fru6libns alatis, alis membranaceis crifpis dentatis. 
Pterococcus aphyllus. Pall. It. ii. 738, t.c^. et iii.^. 356, 
Pallafia cafpica. Linn. Suppl. ic^i. 
Habitat in Mofcovia ad Cafpium mare. Pallas. "6 
Frutex femiorgyalis, ramofus, diffufus, totus floridus, fat fpeciofus. 
Rami alterni, teretes, reclinati, flexuofi, articulati, fubnodofi, 

aphylli. 
Turiones ad fmgula genicula nnmerofiflimi 6 — 10, confertiflimi, 
fafciculati, juncei, nunc fimplices nunc ramofi, quorum pauci 
firmantur in ramos plures pereunt, fubulati, articulati, Isete 
virides f. fere glauci. 
Folia alterna, feflilia, folitaria ad fmgulas articulationes turionum, 

teretia, fubulata, carnofa, turionibus conformia, femiuncialia. 
Stipula f. vagina membranacea, obfolete trifida, marcida, articulum 

ambiens, ut in Polygonis. 
Flores laterales axillarefve, faepius terni ad fmgulum articulum, 
pedunculati, albi difco laciniarum calycinarum virefcente, fra- 
grantes. 

De caeteris confulatur Pallafii Iter, torn. ii. p, 738. 
Herba admodum fimillima in his tribus Calligonis, flores qiioque 
conformes. Differentiae fpecificas e folo frudtu hucufque eruendae 
funt. - 

* Novum Pallafiae genus inter fyngcnefiftas vide apud L'Her. Siirp. ii. 39. t. 19. et 
Ait Kew. 3. p. 498. 

XIX. An 



( i8i ) 



XIX. Obfervations on Poly podium Oreopterisy accompanied with a 

Specimen from Scotland, By Mr. J. Dlc'kjony Fellow of the Llnnean 
Society, 

Read January 5, 1 7 90, 

THIS plant has been miftaken by all our Englifh botanifls. 
By fome it has been confounded with P. Thelypteris, by 
others with P. Filix mas; but it is very di{lin6t from both. Doody, 
Dillenius, Ray, Hudfon, Lightfoot, Bolton, &c. have all fallen 
into the fame error. For a full account of this plant I beg leave to 
refer to Vogler, who has written an entire diflertation upon it, and 
calls it P. montanum. Wildenow gives it the fame name. Ehrhart 
in his Plant. Crypt. Decas 3, No. 22, has publilhed it by that of 
P. Oreopteris, which we prefer ; as the name of P. montanum has 
been given to another fpecies by Allioni. My opinion refpeding 
this fern is fupported by that of Sir Jofeph Banks and Mr. Dry- 
ander, as well as of Dr. Smith and Mr. Jacquin ; and, as the dif- 
fertation above alluded to may not be in every body's hands, 1 lliall 
mention fome of the mod remarkable particulars in which this plant 
differs from P. Thelypteris. 

I ft. P. Thelypt. has a fmall creeping root, of which fee a good 
figure in SchmeideFs Icones Plant, t. xi. P. Oreopteris has a large 
fcaly root, wrapped and tied together with fmall ftrong fibres which 
cannot be feparated without difficulty. 

2d. When 



i82 Mr. DicksonV Ohfervatiom on Polypodium Oreoftens. 

2d. When P. Thelyp. grows old, the under fide of the leaf is 
totally covered with the confluent fru6lifications, and the edges of 
the pinnule are reflexed or contradted. In P. Oreopt. the fru6lifi- 
cations are always on the margins, both in a young and old ftatc, 
and never run into one another; the lobes oval and plain. 

3d. The fize of this plant is four times as large as that of P. 
Thelypteris, and the latter always grows in boggy places ; whereas 
P. Oreopt. grows in dry woods, moors, and on hills, very rarely near 
water. , 

Linnasus, in Flo. Suec. fays of P. Thclypt. punSla mlnutijjima 
Jifperfa. 

I know of no figure of P. Oreopteris. Mr. Bolton has given a 
fmall fig. t. 22, f. 2, which may be it; but as he has* joined it 
with P. Thelypt. it is not worth notice*. 

I have found it both in England and Scotland, moft plentifully 
in the latter. ::.:.. 

How Mr. Lightfoot could miftake this fern, I cannot underftand. 



* Since the above was written, Mr. Bolton has, in a letter to Mr. Dickfon, acknow- 
ledged his P. Thelypteris to be the P. Oiecpteris. His Acroftichum Thelypteris (Fil, Brit. 
t. 43.} is the true Polypodium Thelypteris of Linnaeus. 



XX. Account 



( i83 ) 



XX. Account of a fptnnlng LimaXy or Slug. By Mr, Thomas Hoy^ of 
Gordon Caflky AJfoclate of the Linnean Society, 

Read February 2, 1790. 

IT is well known thatfeveral infe(5ls, fuch as Spiders and theCa- 
teq:>illars of many fpecies of Moths, can convey themfelves fafely 
through the air, without wings, by means of filk. lines or threads 
fpun out of their own body : but it has not been obferved (as far 
as I know) that any fpecies, arranged under Linnaeus's clafs of 
Vermes, is poflefTed of a fimilar power of felf-conveyance. An in- 
ftance occurred to me, about a year ago, which leaves me no room 
to doubt but that fome of them can convey themfelves, at leaft 
downivards from a confiderable height, in that manner. In going 
through a plantation of Scotch firs, I obferved fomething hanging 
from a branch of one of them, at a little diftance. As it feemed to 
be larger than any Caterpillar of the tribes Geometrce or Tortrices^ 
that I was acquainted with, it attracted my particular notice. When 
I approached it, I found it to be a Snail-t or rather Slug ^- ; and, at 
firft, fuppofed that it had been fhaken from the tree by wind, after 
having been entangled in a Spider's web, or among the filk lines 
of fome Caterpillar. Upon obferving it, however, more attentively, 
it was hanging by one line only, which was attached to its tail. This 

* Limax. 

< line 



184 Mr. Hoy'j Account of 

line or thread, at the diftance of one inch and a half from the 
animal, appeared to be as fine as thofe fpun by the Aranea diadema^ 
but nearer to its body it was thicker; and, at its juniSlion to the 
tail, was broad and flat, exactly correfponding to the tail itfelf. 
The Slug was four feet below the branch from which it was fuf- 
pended, and at the diftance of four feet and a half from the ground; 
to which it was approaching gradually at the rate of an inch in 
about three minutes, flower confiderably than its ordinary motion, 
either upon the ground, or even in afcending the trunk of a tree ; 
not fo flow, however, as one would expeft, if it is confidered that a 
Slug is notfurnlfhed, like the infers above mentioned, with a par- 
ticular refervoir of glutinous liquid, from which the filk lines are 
fpontancoufly and almoft inftantaneoufly emitted ; but that the 
line, by which it defcends, is drawn from that flimy, glutinous 
exudation gradually fecreted from its pores, and covering its whole 
body. It feemed to require a great degree of exertion in the animal 
to produce a continued fupply of this liquid, and to make it flow 
towards its tail. For this end it alternately pulTied out its head, and 
drew it back again below its Afield; turned it as far as poflible, firfl: 
to one fide and then to the other, as if thereby to prefs its fides, and 
fo to promote the fecretion. This motion of the head in a horizontal 
dire6lion to one fide, made its whole body turn round ; whereby 
the line by which it hung was neceflarily twifted, and from being 
flat became round. Befides, it might perhaps tend to draw oft" 
the glutinous matter, and thus lengthen the line; which could 
fcarcely be eff'e6led merely by the weight of the Slug, although 
that was pretty confiderable, being between fixteen and feventeen 
grains. 

This Slug feemed to be of a fpecies between the Limax ctgrefiis 
2Ci\dijiavus. Linn, Its fpecific chara6ler might be, 

LiMAX (Jilans) clnercm margine Jlavo, 

Perhaps 



a fpinnifig Lhnax. tS^ 

Perhaps the fliade of the fir-trees, and the u^ct foggy weather 
when I obferved it, may have rendered the L'lmax JIavns of a jialer 
colour; therefore I cannot pretend abfolutely to mtroduce this, as a 
new fpecies, to the acquaintance of the Linnean Society. But if 
the foregoing account exhibits a new inftin6t5 or fomcthing that 
has not been heretofore obferved in the animal oeconomy, it may 
perhaps not be below the notice of a Society inftituted for promot- 
ing the knowledge of natural hiftory, 

Ljk. <C4 *Ll i^ wu. ; . 



ADDITIONAL NOTE, 
By Dr. Sbaiv, 

I T is confiderably more than ten years fmce I had an opportu- 
nity of obferving the pha:nomenon fo accurately defcribed by Mr. 
Hoy. Having never either before or fince obferved a fimilar ap- 
pearance, I was inclined to confider it as a circumfbance merely ac- 
cidental ; but as it is thus confirmed by Mr. Hoy, there feems no 
reafon to doubt that the animals of the genus Limax have a power 
of occafionally managing their glutinous excretion in fuch a manner 
as to ferve the purpofe of a thread in a diredt defcent. 

The copy of my own Memorandum on this fubjed is as follows : 

September 27, 1776, 
" Sitting in an arbour about eight feet high, I was amufed with 
a very uncommon fpe6lacle, which I at firft took for a Caterpillar 

B b hanging 



l86 Account of a f pinning' Litnax* 

hanging by its thread, and reaching to within a foot of the ground, 
and therefore I did not much regard it; till on a nearer view I per- 
ceived it, to my great furprife,to be a fmall Slug, about three quarters . 
of an inch in length. It hung by the extremity of its tail, and gra- 
dually defcended till it almoft touched the ground, when I fhook 
it off with my finger. The thread feemed to iffue from the body of 
the animal ; yet I never obferved a fecond or a former inftance of 
any kind of Snail having the faculty of forming a thread.'* 

February 6, 1791. GEORGE SHAW. 



XXI. De^ 



" ( i87 ) 



XXI. Defcriptions of three new Animals Jound in the Pacific Ocean, By 
Mr, Archibald Menzies, Fellow of the Linnean Society, 

Read Aj>ril 6f 1 790. 

1. ECHENEIS lineata. Tab. 17, Fig. i. 

E CAUDA cuneata, flriis capitis decern, lineis albis utrinquc 
• duobus longitudinalibus. 
Habitat in Oceano Pacijico^ inter ^ropicos, iejiudini adherens. 

The body of this fifh is about five inches long; fubulate, fmooth, 
and of a dark brown colour ; dotted all over with minute darker 
fpots, and ornamented with two whitifh longitudinal lines on each 
fide, which begin at the eyes and end in the tail. 

The under mandible is a little longer than the upper, and both 
are furnifhed with minute teeth. The clypeus on the top of the 
head has but ten tranfverfe ftreaks, which is the chief diftinclion 
of this fpecies. 

B 10, P 18, D 33, V 5, A 33, C 14. 

2. F A S C I O L A clavata. Tab. 17, Fig. 2. 

F. corpore teretiufculo annulato rugofo albido poftice 

gibbofo. 
Habitat in Oceano Pacifico^fa:piiis in ventriculo Scombri Pelamidis, 

B b -z This 



1 88 Mr. MenziesV Defcrjptions^ &c. 

This little animal is about two inches long, having a foft cylin- 
drical body annulated with fine wrinkles; and towards the extremity 
it becomes fpherically gibbofe, ending in the anal aperture, and 
llrongly marked with tranfverfe rugoc. About two thirds of its 
length from this extremity, the ventral aperture protrudes ; from 
which to the mouth it becomes very (lender, and on the under fide 
fomewhat deprefled. :?^ ^^^k r^ 

In moving, it faftens itfelf alternately by the ventral aperture and 
its mouth, raifmg its flender neck between them into an arched form 
like a leech, and in this manner drags its body along with a flow 
motion. 

It is of a whitifli colour, fomewhat pellucid, difcharging at its 
mouth a black-coloured fluid, which can eafily be perceived through 
its body. I have often found it in the maws of the boneto, between 
the Tropics, in the Pacific Ocean. 

. ¦ ' .1.. 

3. H I R U D O branchiata. 

XL deprefla attenuata albida, fetis lateralibus ramofis utrln* 
que 7, interaneis fufcis bifidis perlucentibus. 

Habitat in Oceano PaciJicOy teftudini adherens. 

The body, when moving, is about an inch long, of a whitilli pel- 
lucid colour, foft, depreffed, annulated with fine rugae, and towards 
the head attenuated, having a row of foft pellucid branchy briftles 
on each fide, oppofite to one another, making in all feven pair. The 
head is fmall and truncated; but the other extremity is larger, round, 
and dilated. The entrails appear through the body, bifid, and of a 
dark brown colour. 

This fpecies was found in great abundance adhering to a turtle, 
in the Pacific Ocean, between the Tropics. 

XXII. Re- 



( 1% ) 



XXII. Remarh on the Genus Veronica. By James Edward Smth^ M. D, 
F, R, S, Prefideni of the Linnean Society, 

Read May /^f ijgo, '" -- -- 

THE genus of Veronica is one of the mod familiar to Euro- 
pean botanifts. Its generic character is among the cleareft 
and mod decifive, and its fpecies in general as well afcertained as 
thofe of moft large genera. Neverthelefs fome of them are (lill ob- 
fcure ; and as this obfcurity has in many inftances originated with 
the great Linnaeus himfelt, the removal of it is only to be expelled 
from the inveftigation of his Herbarium and original manufcripts. 
The various remarks which I have made on this genus fhall be 
the fubje6l of the following Paper. Not that they are all that re- 
main to be made, but they are all about which I am certain. As 
far as they go they will ferve to correct long-eflablilTied errors, and 
will therefore be not quite unworthy notice; though they may 
hereafter be much increafed, and perhaps corredled, by the en- 
quiries of myfelf or others. 

Dies diem docet, 
I take the fpecies on which I have any thing to remark in the 
order in which they fland in the fourteenth edition of Syftema 
Vegetabilium. 

- 3.V. 



190 Dr. Smith'j Remarks on 

3. V,Jpurm is Veronica fpicata anguftifolia. C. B. Pin. 246, as ap- 
pears from the Sherardian Herbarium at Oxford. 

10. V. officinalis /3 is mofl certainly a diftin6l fpecies from the com- 
mon a. It is plentiful on the Alps of Switzerland and France; 
and I have frequently compared it, in its native foil, with the 
common V. offic. growing in the fame place. 

I prefer the name of V. Allionii, which has been given it 
by Villars, to that of V. pyrenaica, by which Allioni has 
diftinguifhed it, as it is by no means peculiar to the Pyrenean, 
Mountains. Its fpecific chara6ler is as follows : 

V. AUionii^ fpicis lateralibus pedunculatis, foliis oppofitis 
fubrotundls nitidis rigidis, caule glabro reptante. 

Synonyms, 
V. AUionii. Villars^ PI antes de Dauphifte, v. ii. p. 8. 
V. pyrenaica. All. Flo. Ped. 265, t. 46, f. 3. 
V. No. 2. Gerard, Flo. Gall. Prov, 322. 

Defcription. 

jRo<?/ perennial, creeping. -- -- - ¦-* '^^mv^M ^^,. -..,... 

Stem round, fmooth, procumbent, creeping very far. 

Leaves roundiih, or obovate, firm, rigid, totally different in 

fubftance from thofe of V. officinalis, fmooth, fhining, 

crenate, paler on the under fide. 
Spikes oval, denfe, on long footftalks. 
Flowers very numerous, violet- coloured, of a different figure 

from thofe of V. officinalis. 

Villars mentions a variety with hairy leaves and flem, 
which I have never feen. 

12. V. hamtfchatica, Linn. Supp, 83, appears to me a variety of V. 
aphylla, only differing in the greater fize of all its parts. The 

circumflance 



the Genus Veronica, 1(^1 

circumflance of the hairs being articulated like a conferva, is 
common to both plants, as well as the ferratcd leaves. We 
may rejoice to get rid of fo uncouth a trivial name as kamt^ 
Jchatlca\ and indeed all trivial names taken from the countries 
of plants, are now generally laid afide by the more accurate 
and fcientific botanifls. 

15. V. alpha is now certainly known to grow in Britain, having 
been found in the Highlands of Scotland by Mr. Dickfon in 
1786, and not before in this ifland; what has been taken for 
it being either a large variety of V. ferpyllifolia, or V. fruti- 
culofa. 

28. V. multljida. The fynonym of Buxbaum applied by Linnaeus 
to this plant, belongs in facl to V. orientalis, Hort.Kew.* The 
real V. multifida is only known by an original fpecimen in 
the Linnean Herbarium from Siberia, by which it appears to 
be totally diftin6l from V. auftriaca (with which mod people 
confound it) and all the varieties of that plant. Its leaves are 
multipartite, their lacini^ pinnatifid, with the lobes decur- 
rent. 

Calyx quinquefid, perfe6lly fmooth. 

It appears not to turn black or brown in drying, as V. 
auftriaca does. 

The fynonyms of Jacq. Flo. Auftr. t. 329, quoted by 
Murray, ought of courfe to be excluded. 

30. V. lat'ifoUa. To this fpecies is now by common confent referred 
the V. pfeudo-chamasdrys of Jacquin, which indeed fcarcely 
can be deemed even a variety. V. Teucrium and V. pilofa of 
Linnaeus feem alfo to belong to the fame fpecies; but, as I 

* V. heterophylla. Salijh. Ic. tab. 4. 

2 liav^e 



192 Dr. Smith V Remarks on 

have no original fpecimens of thefe two plants, I cannot de- 
termine the matter with abiblute certainty. The long de- 
fcription of V. pilofa, Sp. PI. 1664, is by Linnaeus erafed from 
his own copy, which looks as if he had not been quite clear 
in his ideas on the fubje^. 

32. V. agrejilsy and 

33. V. arvenfs^ are both always found with white flowers in the 

environs of Rome. 

37. V. romana ought certainly to be excluded. All its fynonyms, in 

the firft edition of Species Plantarum, belong to V. acinifolia; 
and the fpecimen in the Linnean Herbarium, from which the 
fpecific difference (as well as the defcription, Mant, 317) was 
made, is mod certainly nothing elfe than V. peregrina. 
V. romana, AU'ion. FJo. Ped. No. 289, t. 85, f. 2, Fillars Dauph, 
V. ii. p. 19, feems alfo to me to be a variety of V. acinifolia, 

38. V. acinifolia* The figure of Vaillant is excellent. 

39. V. peregrina. Its fpecific characSler ought to be thus amended : 

V. floribus folitariis feffilibus, foliis oblongis obtufiufculis den- 

tatis integiifque, caule eredo. 

Fig. 407 of Flo. Dan. feems to be intended for this plant, 
but it is one of the mofl wretched that can be conceived; the 
leaves are there reprefented as ovate and acute. Morifon's 
figure, § iii. t. 24, f. 19, expreffes tolerably well the upper 
part of the plant with entire leaves. ^ ^ 

This fpecies is a native of Sweden and Denmark. I have alfo 
a wild fpecimen gathered by Commerfon at Buenos Ayres. 

< The 



the Genus Ferontca, i l^j 

The lower leaves are almofl always obtufely dentated ; the 
upper ones among the flowers as conflantly entire. 

V. If/'/ol^a, Mant. 2. T72, is accidentally omitted by Murray. It Is the 
V. orientalis, Ocymi folio, flore minimo, of Tournefort's Corolla 
and Herbarium. 

The fpecific character and defcription in Linnaeus's MantifTa 
are very faulty; and the fynonyms of Column a {Ecphr. t. 290) 
and G. Bauhin (Pin, 249) have no kind of affinity to the Lin- 
nean plant. 

The following defcriptioti was made from the Tournefortlan 
Herbarium, when I named the plant V. rubiacea ; but as V. bi- 
loba is a good name already printed, it ought not to be changed. 
V. floribus folitariis, foliis cordato-lanceolatis dcntatis, calycinis 

cequalibus ovatis acuminatis trinerviis. 
V. biloha Linn, exclufis fyn.Bauh. & Columnse. 
V. arvenfis annua, Chamscdryos folio, Buxb. C. I, p. 24, t. 36. 
Roof fibrous, annual. 

JStem three or four inches high, ere<5l, branched, downy. 
Leaves on lliort footftalks, cordato-lanceoiate, acute, ferrated, 

fcarcely hairy. 
Flowers folitary, on footftalks, about the top of the ftem and 

branches, alternate. 
Bradlece lanceolate, acute, entire, llightly ciliated, a little longer 

than the footftalks of the flowers. 
Calyx of the fruit much enlarged, of four leaves, ciliated, equal, 

ovate, acute, each marked with three nerves, and not unlike 

the leaves of fome fpecies of Rubia or Galium : they much 

exceed the corolla and capfule in length. 
Corolla fmall, white. 

Cc Capfuk 



194 -Dr. SMiTH'i Remarks on 

Capfule obcordate, downy. 

Tournefort gathered this plant in the corn-fields of Cappa- 
docia. It may be inferted into the Syftema Veg. next to V. aci- 
nifolia. 

I lliall conclude this paper with the two following fpecies of 
Veronica, defcribed at the fame time from Tournefort's Herbarium* 

V. gentianoldes *, corymbo terminali hirfuto, foliis radicalibus lance- 
olatis acutis fubcrenatis nudis. 

V. orientalis ere6la Gentianellse foliis. 'Tourn, CoroL et Herb. 
V. eredta Blattarise facie. Buxb, C. i, p. 23, t. 35. 

Gathered by Tournefort in Cappadocia, by Buxbaum in Arme- 
nia : Dr. J. Sibthorp alfo found it in his tour to the eaft. 

This fpecies ought to fland next V. bellidioides, to which it is 
next akin, though perfedtly diftin6t, - 

Root perennial. 

The radical leaves are oppofite, lanceolate, acute, irregularly 
crenate, marked with three nerves, perfectly fmooth, pale and 
fomewhat cartilaginous in the margin, and very much refemble 
thofe of Gentiana acaulis. Thofe on the ftem are ftrikingly dif- 
ferent, obtufe and hairy. 

Stem afcending, fmooth below, hairy in the upper part. 
Corymbus fomewhat fpiked, confifting of many flowers. 
Tootjialks hairy. 
Calyx hairy, quadrifid, equal. 
Corolla large, beautiful, of a deep blue* 
AntheriS heart-lhaped, large* 

* V. gentianoldes. Fahl Symh* Bot, p* r» 

The 



the Genus FeronJca, 19^ 

The figure of Buxbaum erroneoufly reprefents the plant alto- 
gether fmooth, and the floral leaves acute. 

Y.fiiformis, floribus folitariis, foliis cordatis crenatis pcdunculo bre* 
vioribus, calycinis lanceolatis. 
V. orientalis, foliis hedera; terreftris, magno flore. Toiirn. Cor, ei 

Herb, Buxh, C i, p. 25, t. 40, f. I. 

Gathered by Tournefort in the eaft. Buxbaum fays it grows 
about hedges in Bithynia. It ihould be placed next to V. hede- 
rifolia. 

Root appears to be annual. 
Stems filiform, procumbent. 
Leaves alternate, on fhort footflalks, fubrotundo-cordate, crenate, 

(not lobed or cut) notches about three on each fide, clothed 

with a few fcattered articulated hairs, as in V. hederifoha, 
"Flowers folitary, axillary, large. 

Footjlalks filiform, downy, three times longer than the leaves. 
Leaves of the Calyx equal, lanceolate, flightly downy. 
Corolla twice as long as the calyx, fpreading, blue. 
Capfule obcordate, reticulated. 

This plant is very like V. hederifolia in many refpecfls, but Is 
fufficiently diftinguilhed from that fpecies by its leaves being ere- 
nate and not five-lobed, the fegments of its calyx lanceolate, 
not ovate, and by the very long filiform footflalks of its flowers. 

.q &tJp^ 



-J. T- \r 



Cc z XXIII. De. 



C 196 ) 



XXIII. Defcriptions of two new Specks of Phalana, By Mr, Louh 
Bofcy of Pari 5 y Foreign Member of the Linnean Society, 

Read OBober 5, 1 790. 

I. PYRALIS tuberculana. 

PALIS anticis grifeis fufco pun6latis margiiie cralliori antice 
• trituberculato. 
H, Parijiis* Larva in Hedyfaro Onobrichide et Goronilla coro- 
nata. 
f Larva fufco viridis. FoIHculum fportse forme, e parenchyma plan- 
tarum fabricatum et cauli affixum. Pupa^xinvo occurrit, et Imago 
Aprili fequentis anni. 

Caput ex albo argenteum ; Palpi comprefll, fufci, albo pun6latl ; 
Antenrice fufcae bafi fubtus argenteae et auriculatae ; OcuU nigri. 
thorax argenteo-grifeoque varius, antice criftatus ; Crijla argentea, 
fufco-bifafciata ; fafcia anterior! minori. Ala deflexae ; Superiorei 
fupra albae, fufco grifeoque punftatae et maculatae ; TubercuJa tria 
feriem formantia margine antice craffiori, omnia aequalia non fcabra, 
dimidio alba et fufca. Al^e mferiores pallide fufca^, pun6to centrali 
nigro. Pedes fufci, albo annulati. 

Tab. 17. Fig, 4. Pyralis tuberculana. 

5. Folliculus pupara continens; 

a. TI- 



Linn.Trans. I.tab.Il. /.). Wfi . 




mrry 







34^'?*- 'J" 



-4 



5 



,,^^AaAvrfai ityy//'tz//,/ ^ly///^rrc^Ua/na 




6 M 



y^y/i<f/^r/frr "L>//?^v? ^' y//^/ /-/•/?/ >7 // //r //a 



IVIr. Bosc'i Defcnptions of two new Thalana, 1^7 

2. TINEA Sparrmannella. 

T. Alis violaceo-nitentibus maculis numerofis aurcis, majori ad 

marginem tenuiorem. 

H. Parijlls, Capitur seflate in palndibus. 

Caput nigrum, hirfatiffimum ; Antennae fufcas, filiformes. Ala 
antica violaceo-nitentes aureo-maculatae. Maculae numerofa^, an- 
gulatae vel irregulares, fupra difcum adfperfce, tamen ad fafcias 
formandas tendentes; duodecim circiter ad marginem crafliorem, et 
una major in medio ad tenuiorem. Subtus, ficut alee poJik<Sy aurato- 
violacese. Pedes fufco argentei. 

Locus in Syflemate poft Tineam MoufFetellam. 
In memoriam pcregrinatoris celeberrimi Andreas Sparrmann, Sue- 
cici, in botanicis et zoologicis verfatiflimi. 

Infeclum pro mole inter fplendidifllma. 
Tab. 17. Fig. 6. Inf. magnit. nat. 

7. Id, au6luiiu .. J, ¦ , • , 



XXIV. ^ 



( 193 ) 



XXIV. T^he Boiatikal Hjjlory of the Genus DlllenJa, with /an Addition 
of fever al no?idefcript Species, By Charles Peter T'hunberg^ Knight of 
the Order of IFafa, Profejfor of Botany and Medicine in the Univerfty 
ffUpfal, Foreign Member of the Linnean Society* 

Read December 7, 1790. 

INTER arbores illas Indicas, quarum figuras et defcriptlones 
nobifcum communicarunt illuftrifT. Rheede in Horto Malaba- 
rico et Rumphius in Herbario Amboinenfi, Dillenije Genus certe 
adeo fpeciofum fefe ofFeit, ut ulterius et accuratius noftrum examen 
merito mereri videatur. Hujus fpeciem non nifi unicam, a Rheede 
ab Ouds Hoorn commemoratam, illuftiis a Linne in Syftemate fuo 
fexuali collocavit, ac minus jufte hue retuUt Songium Rumphii, qui 
quidem, uti etiam ejus Sangius valde difUmiles et diftin6l2e funt, atque 
fie etiam tres diverfas conftituunt fpecies. Poftea, fub meis in infula 
Ceilona excurfionibus botanicis, tres alias et quidem valde ab in- 
vicem diftin6las fpecies indagare mihi contigit, fie ut fex fint, quae 
fub Dillenise pulcherrimo genere, jam militent fpecies. Has omnes, 
brevitcr defcriptas, novafquc depi6las, non indignas fore credidi, qua; 
infcrantur A6lis Societatis, qu^e non modo pro incremento Hiftoiise 
Naturalis, et imprimis Botanices, fed etiam pro ulteriori ejus refor- 
matione fedulo vigilare fibi propofuit. 

Chara^er generis^ in Generibus Plantarum Linnsei allatus, vitu- 

perandus omnino non eft, licet ill, botanicus ipfe ipfam non vidiffet 

3 , plantam 



"X 



Zimi . Ti -ans. I. tab. IS. p. W9. 




Vv?//^ //r/c^/^}a 



Profeffhr Thunberg'j Hijlory of the Genus Biihnia, 199 

plantam vivam vel ficcatam, fed ex defcriptione ct fignra Rheediana 
illam deicripriflet, et licet, quoad reliquas fpecies, parum cmendan- 
dus erit. 
Cal. Perianthium pentaphyllum : fol'wla obovata, obtufa, concava, 

coriacea, intus glabra, extus villofa, per fi ft en ti a. 
Corolla pentapetala, decidua. Petala obovata, in feme attenuate- 
anguftata, obtufiflima, tenuifTime fubcrenata, concaviufcula, 
calyce longiora. 
St AM. F'llamenta fubnulla, fed 

Antherce numcrofiffima:, germinis bafi infertrc, lincares, au- 

rantiacae, linea nigra exaratse, calyce breviores, 
Tollen flavum. V. • 

PisT. Germen fuperum, ovatum. 

Styli plures, ere6ti, fimplices, antheris longiores, '" "V*^. 

i. . Stigmata fnnplicia, 

Frudlum maturum videre non licuit. 

Species. 

'-''.. I, T). Integra: (Tab. 18.) foliis obovatis obtufis fubintegris, 
pedunculis unifloris.. . 
O'^/V in infula C^/7<?^/i?, Indfse Orien talis. 
Ceilonenjibus: Gudapara et Runumidale. 
Arbor ramis alternis, rugofis, fufcis, glabris. 
Folia alterna, petiolata, obovata, obtufa, a medio ad api- 
cem ferrulata ferraturis obfoletis vixque manifeftis, 
utrinque glabra, coriacea, fupra viridia, fubtus palli- 
diora, nervofa nervis alternis parallelis furfum curvis, 
utrinque inter nervos tenuiflime reticulata, patentia, 
fubfpitham^ea, palmam lata. 
, Petioli femiteretes, canaliculati, villofij pollicares. 

; •' ^ Flores 



200 ProfeJJhr ThunbergV Bi/fory 

j;i i.-' -: J Flores in ultimis ramulis terminales, fubfolltarii, peJun- 
„¦;';-¦ culati. 

Ufus : Deco6lo foliorum utuntur Geilonenfes ad ulcera 

depuranda. 

2. D./pecw/a: foliis oblongis, rotundato-acutis denticulatis, pcdiin- 
culis unifloris. •¦> . 

Crefcit^ ut alTeverat Rheede, in Malaharia ; in Java ipfe inveni 

crefcentem. 
Dillenia Indica, Linn. Syft. Veget. xiv. p. 507, Spec. Plant, p. 754, 
^ exclufo fynonymo Rumphii. 

Syalita Malabaris, Rheede Hort. Malabar, torn, iii, p. 39, 

tab. 38, 39. 
j^rbor excelfa ramis craffis, rugofls, cinereis, glabris. 
Folia alterna, petiolata, oblongo-rotundata, obtufa cum acumine, 
undato-denticulata, parallelo-nervofa nervisfuboppofitis, fupra 
glabra, fubtus obfcura, fufcefcentia, fubpedalia, palmam lata. 
Peiiolus crafTus, brevis, vix poilicaris. 
Flares tetminales in ramulis, iblitarii, pedunculati. 
^. D. eUiptica: foliis elliptico-ovatis acutis ferratis, peduncuHs 
uninoris. "^pi^PilPiF^ 

Crefcity ex audoritate Rumphii, in Ambolna^ Celebe, Macajfaria. 
Songhim Rumph. Herbar. Amboin. torn. ii. p. 140, tab, 45. 
Folia alterna, petiolata, elliptica, acuminata, argute ferrata, ner- 

vofa: nervis oppofitis, parallelis. 
Flares tcrminales, folitarii, pedunculati. 
4. D. reiiifa: (Tab. 19.) foliis obovatis truncatis ferratis, pedunculls 
unifloris. 
Crefdt in Ceilonae fylvis. 
j^rbor ramis alternis, rugofis, fufcis, glabris. 
Ffjlia alterna, approximata, petiolata, obovata ; inferne attenuata, 

integra ; 



Ziim .jyatis.I.tah . W . p. 200 




linnTr-fuuf . I tab . 2C . p . 201 . 




of the Oems Dillenla, 201 

Integra ; fuperne remote ferrata fcrraturis obfoletis ; apice trun- 
cata, fubretufa; coriacea, utrinque glabra, nervofa : ncrvis 
parallelis, alternis, furfum curvatis ; inter nervos tenuiffime 
reticulata, patentia, palmam fere lata, et duplo longiora. 

•Petioli femiteretes, canaliculati, bafi hirfuti, vix pollicares. 

Flos terminalis, folitarius, pedunculatus. 

5. D. ferrata : foliis elliptico-ovatis acutis ferratis, pedunculis tri- 

lloris. • 
Crefcit, fecundum Rumphium, in Celebe^ Macajfariay yava, 
Sungms^ Rumph. Herbar. Amboin. torn. ii. p. 142, tab. 46. 
Folia alterna, petiolata, elliptica, acuta, argute ferrata, nervofa : 

nervis fuboppofitis et alternis, parallelis. 
Flores in pedunculis lateralibus tcrni, pcdicellati. 

6. D. dtntata (Tab. 20) : foliis ovatis retufis dentatis, pedunculis 

trifloris. 
Crefcit in Ceilona* 
Ce'ilonenfbus : Diapara. 

Arbor ramis alternis, rugofis, cinereis, glabris. 
FoUa alterna, petiolata, ovata, obtufilTima feu emarginato-retufa, 

inferne integra, fuperne et apice dentata, coriacea, nervofa : 

nervis fuboppofitis, parallelis, furfum dire6tis, utrinque glabra, 

fupra viridia, fubtus obfcuriora, palm aria. 
FetioU angulati, glabri, folio paulo breviores. 
Flores in ramis terminales, racemofi, fubterni. 
PedkelU alterni, glabri, femipollicares. 



. D d XXV. ne 



( 202 ) 



XXV. 'The Botanical Hijlory of TrifoHum alpejlre^ medium^ and praienfe. 
By Adam jlfzelhii^ M. A. Demonftrator of Botany in the XJnlverfty of 
Upfalj Foreign Member of the Linnean Society, 

Read November 2, 1790* 

WITH a view of publilhing a new edition of the Flora Suecic^ 
of the late illuftrioiis Linnaeus, I have long been occupied 
in procuring information concerning the Swediih Plants. Having 
fpent ten years in this purfuit, I flattered myfelf with the idea of 
knowing all thofe defcribed by him, a few only excepted, which I 
could not perfe6lly make out. But on my arrival in this country 
I found myfelf in an error; having met with many of the moft 
common plants in Sweden, which in England bear quite different 
names. This difcovery opened to me a new field of fludy and la- 
bour. It was neceffary to examine whether the Englifh or Swe- 
difh botanifts underftood by the true names the plants defcribed by 
Linnaeus. It would indeed be an inexcufable fault in the Swedifh 
ones, if they, who had conftant accefs to, and were tutored by, 
their mafter himfelf, ihould neverthelefs be always in the wrong 
in fuch cafes ; accordingly we find the foreign natural hiftorians 
now and then likewife miftaken. 

This is the lefs furprifmg, as, in the firft place, Linn^us has 
often mifquoted fynonymous names from the ancient authors ; and, 
in the fecond place, when he has not given the defcription of the 

plants. 



Mr. AfzeliusV Hj/lory of three Species of TrlfoUunu 20 



3 



plants, his characleriftics alone, being fhort and concife, will not 
always fuffice to diflinguiih his plant from all others. This diffi- 
culty is great where there is no recourfe to the fpecimen itfelf 
which he defigned by fuch a name. A plant might be found in this 
country, for inftance, which Linnaeus never knew; which never- 
thelefs might agree perfe6lly with the characleriftics of one in his 
fyftem, though it differed very effentially from it in many other 
refpedls : this might give rife to miftakes ; as has frequently 
been the cafe. 

If Linnaeus h as been the involuntary caufe of fuchconfufion,he has, 
however, a claim to our indulgence ; for, independent of his want of 
leifure for minutely inveftigating every appellation given each plant 
by various botanifts, he could not, in clafTifying nature, derive any 
affiftance from preceding authors, as thefe in general furniflied him 
but with a vague and confufed found of terms, owing to their own 
ignorance and careleflhefs, whereby they have flrangely miflaken 
and confounded many very different plants. This has particularly 
been the misfortune of that inaccurate compiler Cafpar Bauhin, 
and in a great meafure alfo of Haller; fo that, in confulting the 
former efpecially, one is always uncertain what he means. Another 
confideration is, that Linnaeus at that time had no figures to refer 
to, except thofe of old authors, which at times are only cuts in wood, 
and for the moft part fo badly executed, that it is a hard matter, 
and fometimes even impofiible, to pronounce which plant they 
are precifely meant to reprefent ; efpecially when the queftion is of 
two fpecies nearly related. 

But, be this as it may, I find that the wrong quotations of Lin- 
naeus have often led other authors into error; owing apparently to 
their having paid more attention to his citations than to his very 
chara6\;erifhic defcriptions of plants, which however are the chief 
things to be confidered ; and, if maturely weighed, fufficient to pre- 

D d 2 vent 



ao4 Mr* AfzeliusV Hi/lory of 

vent many miftakes. I Ihall do myfelf the pleafure of communi- 
cating fucceflively my obfervations relative to cafes of this nature; 
but at prefent ihall confine myfelf to three fpecies of Trefoil, 
which, common as they are, particularly two of them, flill 
want a good deal of illuftration. Thefe plants haye, even till this 
very time, not only been confounded among themfelves, but 
alfo with many others. And though we are now furniihed with 
good figures of each, ftill the true limits between them are not yet 
drawn ; nor have thefe fpecies as yet been fo minutely and accu- 
rately examined, as for the always invariable and diftinguilliing 
chara6lerifl:ics of each to have been pointed out. 

In order to form an adequate idea of thefe Trefoils, and to know 
their hiftory from the beginning to the prefent time, I have exa- 
mined all authors quoted by Linnasus, Reichard, Murray, and the 
Englifh botanifts, with many others that I have been favoured 
with an opportunity of feeing in the large and choice library of Sir 
Jofeph Banks ; without which afliftance, and the examination of 
the Linnean Herbarium, my enquiries would have been confined 
and imperfect. In the courfe of my inveftigations I have difco- 
vered, that many of the authors cited treat of plants quite different 
from thofe for which they have been quoted; and that others fpeak 
infuch a manner, that it is impofTible to judge to what particular fpe- 
cies their inaccurate figures, confufed defcriptions, and vague cha- 
ra^teriftics, if at times even all three are to be found together, are 
the mod applicable. With regard to thofe authors who have either 
been miftaken themfelves in their quotations, or been mifquoted 
by others, I have, to the bell of my judgment, endeavoured to put 
them in their proper places : and, as to the others, I could do no 
more than make my obfervations, and give my opinion, where parti- 
cular bints or circuniftances have not enabled me to difcover what 

thejr 



three Species of Trifollum* 205 

they meant Upon the whole, indeed, thefe authors are of a local 
life only, in pointing out to their own countrymen the places 
where their native plants are to be found. 

In the firft place, therefore, I beg leave to give a brief hiftory of 
each of thefe three Trefoils, and fhew with which each of them 
has been, and ftili is, confounded, together with my reafons for 
what alterations I may have made. In the fecond place, I fhall 
quote the genuine fynonyms of authors, whom I am by fufficient 
reafons convinced to have treated of thefe plants. And, thirdly, I 
fhall add an adequate defcription of each, with particular charac- 
teriftics fufficient at all times to diftinguilh them from each other, 
and from the fpecies neareft related to them. To begin then with 

TRIFOLIUM ALPESTRE. 

Clufius is, to my knowledge, the firft who mentions this Trifo- 
lium, in his Hiftory of the Hungarian and Auftrian Plants. He 
has left us no figure ; but his defcription, brief and imperfexSt as 
it is, ftill fuffices to convince us that he meant the real one. He 
fays that, both in fhape and fize, it much refembles the preceding, 
which is either Tr. pannonicum or Tr. monianum-, but that its 
leaves are fomewhat more narrow; its flowers red, and without 
fmell; its fpikes in general two in number, one of which is fmaller 
than the other, and both of them clofe together at the top of the 
ftalk, without peduncles, and as it were concealed within the upper- 
moft leaves. This defcription he has afterwards introduced unal- 
tered into his larger Hiftory of Rare Plants. 

Cafpar Bauhin has quoted both thefe paflages of Clufms under 
his Trifolium montanum purpureum majusy in his Pinax ; from which 
it indeed appears probable that he meant the fame plant, but it is* 
not quite certain j as he adds, Tnfolif altera fpscies major, Gefn. and 

^rifGlium. 



2o6 Mr. Afzelius'x Hljhry ef 

^Trifolium allud montanum fnajus. Thai, who appear to treat of fpecies 
different from thofe of Clufins. Gefner fays only that his Trifo- 
Hum is larger and more common than pratenfe: but thefe remarks, 
though brief, give more reafon to fuppofe he meant 'TriJoL me^ 
Jium, than alpeflrey which latter is rather a fcarce plant, and 
but little refembling our common clover. On the other hand, 
Thalius defcribes his Trifolium as having oblotigum quajtque fpicatum 
capttulum\ adding that the TrifoL fpicatum, which Tragus calls 
Cyt'iJuSy only differs from it by having longer leaves as well as fpikes. 
Now the Cytifus of Tragus being 'Trifol. ruhens a, it is alfo pro- 
bable that the plant of Thalius is its variety jS ; and if this be the 
Cafe, C. Bauhin would have done better had he placed this quota- 
tion under his Trifolium /pica oblonga rubra. Perhaps this author, 
never fcrupulous in his quotations, meant, however, by his firft- 
mentioned Trifolium, the real alpejire. 

But, at all events, Bauhin has been indifcriminately quoted by 
cveiy fucceeding writer that had occafion to treat of either 2r//o- 
lium alpejire or medium. Among the authors more immediately fuc- 
ceeding him, 1 have had an opportunity of confulting John 
Bauhin, Ray, Ruppius, Tournefort, and Boerhaave. Both the 
firil-mentioned, in their Hillorix Plantarum, have copied the 
defcription of Clufms ; and thus there is no doubt but their Tri- 
fohum w^as the true alpejire. But Ray has made a miflake in add- 
ing Ger, Em, 1 1 86. 4, and Park, 1103. i ; for both thefe treat of 
'Trifolium /pica oblonga rubra^ C. B, under which name he has like- 
wife quoted them, and confequently twice on the fame page, and 
under two different fpecies. Here I mufl alfo notice another mif- 
take committed by Ray, or rather, perhaps, by his editor Dillenius, 
In his Hiftory, as well as both the firft editions of his Synopfis, he has 
defcribed a Trifolium which is the real medium, without referring to 
2 any 



three Species of Trifolium, 207 

any preceding author. But in the third edition we find quoted fuch as 
have intended the TrifoL alpejlre, Ruppius has done the fame, re- 
marking at the fame time that his 'TrifoUum fere Jimile efl Hit quodferi- 
tur in agrh ad jumentorum pabulum', and thus it can be no other than 
the medium. Tournefort and Boerhaave, as ufual, have no defcrip- 
tion, and confequently we cannot judge but from their quotations ; 
and if they knew the meaning of their authors, they certainly in- 
tended the alpejlre. Yet Boerhaave has added Morif. 2. 139. i, which 
is certainly an error, as Morifon there treats of Trifol. rubens (2. 

Among recent authors, I mean fuch as wrote after the reforma- 
tion of botany by Linnaeus, and until he named the Trfol. a/pe/ire, 
I have ftudied Van Royen, Haller, Scopoli, and Hudfon. The firfl 
of thefe has given us only the fpecific differences of his plants, 
which afford no great information ; but ftill, in calling its folia 
¦cvato-olflonga, integerrima, he feems rather to hint at the 'TrifoL medium. 
That Haller, Scopoli, and Hudfon had alfo this in view, is beyond a 
doubt, as I fhall foon prove. I will juft obferve here, that Haller, 
under this head, has not only brought in feveral varieties, which 
indeed I have not feen, but that appear to be different fpecies; but, 
.according to his ufual pra<Si;ice, has injudicioufly huddled together 
a vaft number of fynonyms, particularly in his Stirpes Helvetica?, 
which belong to at leafl three feparate fpecies of Trifolium, viz. 
rubens /3, alpejlre^ and medium. 

Nearly the fame confufion is obfervable in his edition of 
Ruppius ; for, after having copied the above-mentioned dcfcription 
of Trifol medium by that author, he adds a circumftance that belongs 
to the rubens. I have at leafb not yet feen any fpecies befides this 
laft, of which it can be faid, vaginis petiolorum floralium latioribus a 
vulgari praienp differt. That Haller alfo really meant the rubens^ I am 
further induced to believe, from his having, in this edition, left out 

I'rifoliwTi 



2o8 Mr. Afzelius'j Bifiory of 

Trtfolium monianum, /pica longijfima rubente, C. B. which is found in 
both the preceding ones; and alfo from his having added the 
figure of Rivinus, Tab. 12, which indeed reprefents the alpejire^ 
but for want of attention might eafily be miftaken for the rubens /?. 
At lafl Linnasus introduced l^rifol alpeftre into the fecond edition 
of Species Piantarum. But this, inftead of fetthng the confufion, 
fcrved rather to increafe it. For, befides the genuine fynonyms of 
Clufius and J. Bauhin, he has alfo added the uncertain ones of 
Van Royen and C. Bauhin, together with fome obfervations, 
which, though very brief, ftill unfortunately regard three diftindt 
fpecies, viz. alpeftre^ medium, and pratenfe. Afterwards he inferted 
this into the twelfth edition of Syft. Naturae, with the following 
alteration — that the word feJiUbus in the fpecific chara6ler was left 
out, as was neceflary, when he confounded it with medium, which 
frequently has pedunculated fpikes. A more ample defcription was 
alfo made, with a view of diftinguiiliing it from tht. pratenfe. But 
the diftinguifhing marks, taken chiefly from the ftipulse, may fuit 
the alpejlre as well as the medium^ although this latter bears a flronger 
refemblance to pratenfe than the former does. 

Of all the authors who from that time have treated of the TrifoL 
alpejlre<i I am not certain that any one bcfides Jacquin, Allioni, 
and perhaps Doerrien, had the real one in view. I fay nothing of 
Murray and Reichard ; as what they have inferted into their edi- 
tions of the Syftem, is nothing further than copies from the twelfth 
edition, except their having ftill more confounded it with the 
medium, by quoting other authors, who were miftaken themfelves. 

Thus profeflbr Jacquin is the firft perfon to whom we are 
indebted for a perfe<5l and- juft idea of l^rlfoL alpejire, from his good 
figures and defcriptions, firft in his obfervations, and afterwards in 
his Flora Auftriaca. But his quotations are not all to the pur- 

pofe; 



three Species of Tnfollum. 209 

p"ofe ; for, in my opinion, independent of the equivocal C. Bauhin, 
neither Van Royen, Haller, nor Grantz are properly cited. Of the 
firft oi thefe I have already fpoken ; and, with regard to the three 
latter, Haller, meaning to diftinguilli his Trifolium from the pra- 
ienfe, mentions, indeed, nothing but what ferves for this purpofe ; 
neverthelefs, when he fays that it has vagina in laiiufcula foliola ter- 
niinata^j orjlipul^e lanceolata^ folia fuperne raro maculata^ calyx glaber, ^ 
forum fpica obcfor, he can hardly intend this for any other than me- 
dimn. The fame is the cafe with refpecl to Grantz, who tells us 
that his plant has cauks ramof, angulofi, vagina petiolorum friis ruben- 
tibus, folia inferior a et media integerrima^ fed fuperiora ciliaio-ferrata^ and 
calyx bafi dentibufqiie color atis\ all of which does not accord with the 
alpejlre^ except that the vaginae are fometimes, though very feldom, 
marked with a few red ftreaks, whereas thofe of the medium are 
almoft always fo. 

Before Jacqiiin, Rivinus had in the laft century given us a pretty 
good figure of TrifoL alpefre. But although Haller in his Stirpes 
HelvetictC referred to him, he has neverthelefs happened afterwards' 
to be con flan tly overlooked ; probably becaufe the plant was not well 
known until Jacquin publillied his obfervations. Thus we have 
now three figures of this Trifolium, all of which are original. 

Though profeflbr Allioni has not given us any defcription, yet> 
as he has admitted into his Flora the 'TrifoL fexuofum oi '^^.cc^mn^ 
there is reafon to fuppofe his alpefre may be the real one ; though 
he alfo has quoted all the authors fet afide by Jacquin, and whom I 
have already mentioned ; adding Scopoli likewife, who certainly 
means the 'Trifol. medium, though he terms it alpeftfe \ for he fays 
that it has a caulis fubangulatus^ folia fubtus palUdioray tumor calhfus 
inter ramos et caulem^ and calyx glaber friis rubris exaratus, 

Madame Doerrien, as llie immediately before mentions a Trifo- 

E e lium 



110 Mr. Afzelius'j Account of 

Hum which appears to be medium, mud certainly by her alpejlre un- 
derftand another fpecies, and perhaps the true one ; at leafl Ihc 
defcribes the leaves as having Ihort footftalks, and being deftitute 
of white fpots; and the teeth of the calyx, efpecially the lowermoft, 
very long and hairy. On account of this lafl exprelTion, her plant 
might rather be fuppofed 'T'rifoL rubens ; but this conje6lure falls to 
the ground, when fhe fays that the heads of the flowers are 
roundifh. 

The other modern authors who have treated of T'rifoL alpejlre^ 
feem all to have erred. But as in all probability they have not all 
had the fame fpecies in view, any more than has been fhewn to 
have been the cafe with the old writers, I proceed, in order to pre- 
fent in a clear point of view this plant, which all along has been fo 
confufedly defcribcd, to enumerate all the Trifolia with which from 
remoter times to the prefent day it has been confounded, and which 
are the following, viz. 

I. TrifGlium rubens ^. 
As undoubted fynonyms of which I may mention here — 

TrifoUum majus flore purpureo. Ger, Em, p. 1186. 

n. J 4. •¦'- 
Trifolium montanum majus purpureum. ParL Theair*, 
p. 1 103, n. I. * Et Trifolium montanum majus fiore 
purpureo. Ih'td. p. 1104, n. i. fg^fup. integr, 
Trifolium purpureum montanum majus fpica oblonga* 
Mor, Hjfl, ii. p. 139, n. i. ^^ Et Trifolium Lagopoides 
montanum, 3. Clus. Ibid, fe6t. 2, tab. 12, fig, i, 
fee, ord. 
All thefe authors exhibit one and the fame "figure taken from 
Clufius ; and of which, in the next article of TrifoL medium^ I fhall 
have an opportunity of fpeaking further. As I have faid before, 
3 Gerard 



three Specks of TrifoIJumJ in 

Gerard and Parkinfon are cited by Ray, and Morifon by Boer- 
haave. 

To this place might perhaps alfo be referred — 

Trifohum aUud montanum majus, Thai Here. p. 123, fq. * 
Trifolium foUo longo flore purpureo Riv. Rupp. Jen, 

Ed, Hall, p. 254, fq. * 
Trifolium fpicis fubglobofis villofis terminalibus feflilibus, 
caule ere6to, foliis lanceolatis ferrulatis. Gmel. Sib. iv. 
p. 22, n. 20. 
' Thalins and Ruppius I have before mentioned ; and have now 
only to add, that Haller alfo in his Stirpes Helveticse has quoted 
the firft under 'Trifol. rubens (3, p. 584, n. ii. * As to Gmelin, it is 
indeed uncertain what he meant, as he has added no defcription ; 
but if his quotation of Trifolium fpica oblonga rubra^ C, B. be true, 
his Trifolium is not alpeftre^ but rubens. It is poffible too that 
he may have confounded thefe two fpecies, which fo nearly re- 
femble each other, that miftakes might eafily be made, and are the 
more pardonable. Notwithftanding this, they are really diftin6l; 
for, befides the 'Trifolium rubens being in general larger, its leaves 
are on both fides free from hairs; and in the edges they are finely 
ferratcd by means of the veins running out into fmall curved points 
dire6led towards the top, fhorter and longer alternately, exa6lly as 
in Trifol. montanum ; both vaginae and ftipulse, particularly of the 
floral leaves, are much larger, and not hairy; the former fwelling, 
and the latter fomewhat ferrulated : the fpikes in the beginning 
feflile, and concealed within the floral vaginse, exaclly as in TrifoL 
iilpejire ; but afterwards they grow more or lefs pedunculated, oval, 
oblong, or cylindrical : calyx fmooth, but its teeth hairy ; and the 
lowermofl of thefe teeth are as long as the whole flower. 

E e 2 2. 7r/- 



212 Mr. AfzeliusV Account of 

2. 'Trifolium medium. 

AlthoDgh I am but little furprifed at the earlier authors having 
fometimes miftaken the 7'rifoL rubens for alpejlrcy I very much won- 
der that the modern ones could confound alpeftre with medium^ or 
regard this latter as the true alpeflre. Neverthelefs this has fre- 
quently been the cafe; for, after it had been named byLinnasus, I have 
found about twenty authors mentioning a Trifolium which they call 
alpeflre^ only two or perhaps three of whom, as I have faid above, 
may with certainty be affirmed to have treated of the genuine one. 
Mod of the reft, to judge by their writings, have had the Trifol, 
medium in view, though, exclufive of its ftipulas and the chara^ler- 
iflics common to the whole genus, it bears very fmall refemblance 
to the alpejlre : for its ftem is flexuofe, angular and branched : the 
footftalks longer and divaricated; the leaves broader; the fpikes 
generally pedunculated ; calyx moftly fmooth, and its teeth larger, 
&c. Whereas the 'Trlfoh alpeftre has a ftraight, round, and fimple 
ftem; Ihort and ere(5t footftalks; narrow and ftrongly veined leaves; 
fpikes conftantly feflile ; a calyx always downy, and all over of the 
fame colour ; its teeth fhorter than thofe of the medium^ but the 
lowermoft oi\q is proportion ably longer. ... ^ ; 

3. Trifolium pratenfe, 

Linnaeus fays of Trlfol. alpeftre that it is ramls copkftjjlmh luxurians 
in fails. But I am confident he never faw either the alpeftre or the 
medium in a cultivated ftate ; and confequently that by this expreflion 
he points at the pratenfe^ ^\'hich is commonly cultivated in Sweden 
as well as other countries ; and, through cultivation, varies into 
fuch a refemblance to 'Trifol. medium, that, without ftri(5l and mi- 
nute examination, they can hardly be diftinguiflied. Still the pra- 
Unfe has always cauks bqfi adfcendeniesj and they are not flexuofe ; 

branches 



three Specks of TrlfoUum. 213 

branches and leaves ere6l, but not divaricated ; vaginas and flipulse 
much larger than thofe of the medium, and the flipulas terminating 
in a fetaceous awn; the fpikes Tingle, and without a peduncle; 
the flowers ere^l, not divaricated; and the lowefl tooth of the calyx 
far fhorter than the tube of the corolla, &c. 

As Linnaeus confounded Trlfol. medium with alpejlre^ and faw it 
growing in Sweden on all dry hills near forefts, refembling the cul- 
tivated pratenfe^ we fee the origin and reafon of the above-mentioned 
expreffion, ramis copiofijjimis luxurians in fatis ; which however he af- 
terwards excluded, having probably obferved his miftake. How far 
the I'rifoL alpejlre is fit for cultivation, I cannot determine ; but, as 
to medium^ I have reafon to think it is not. For I have obferved the 
fame fmgularity refpecSling it which profefTor Jacquin mentions — 
that, when planted in gardens, in a good and loofe foil, it generally 
grows more ilender, and particularly its fpikes become fmaller; but 
on eminences, in a dry, hard, and uncultivated clay bottom, it grows' 
fpontaneoufly very luxuriant. 

4. 'Tnfolium pannonicum. 

To this I think may be referred — 

Trifclium alpeftre. Gouan, Illuftr, p. 52. * 

Many cultivated plants being feen producing variegated flowers, 
it has been fuppofcd that the fame might alfo be the cafe with 
refpeft to the wild ones. But on ftrider fearch it will be found, 
that in this point plants are moftly in the fame predicament with 
animals, the tame or domefl:icated individuals of which vary greatly 
as to colour, but not the wild ones. It has alfo been difcovered 
that various plants with differently-coloured flowers, which have 
been long efleemed only varieties of each other, are really diflin6l fpe- 
cies ; and that, on more minute examination, befldes the difference 

of 



214 Mr. AfzeliusV Account of 

of colour firfl obferved, they alfo differ in other refpecls, particu- 
larly as to their parts of fru6lification. Thus when profeflTor 
Gouan fays of his TrlfoL alpejlre, that it has j^^r^J ochroleuciy there is 
reafon to fufpe6i; its not being the real one ; and as we have no 
other fpccies than the ochroleucum, pannonlcum^ and montanum, which 
anfwer to this defcription, and are otherwife as to their form and 
appearance nearly related to the alpejire^ it may naturally be fup- 
pofed that he meant one of thefe three : now it cannot be either 
the ochroleucum or the montanum^ as he has feparately mentioned 
thefe in the fame place ; confequently his TrlfoL alpejire muft either 
be the pannon'wum^ or a new fpecies. 

TRIFOLIUM MEDIUM. 
If my conjecture already mentioned refpe6ling Gefner be jufl, he 
is the firfl author who treats of thisTrifolium. But the firfl certain 
account of it was given by Ray in his Hiflory ; and it is evident, 
from his defcription, that he meant the real one. As in its appear- 
ance it refembles the pratenfcy he has juflly compared them together, 
faying, that the medium is in all refpecls larger ; that the leaves are 
not always marked with white fpots, and that they have more con- 
fpicuous veins, particularly on the under fide ; that the fpikes are* 
more round, having long peduncles ; and that the flowers are of a 
deeper purple. But he commits an error in believing it to be the 
fame as that cultivated in meadows : yet he has altered this in the 
firfl edition of his Synopfis; and in the fecond he kept them feparate, 
as did alfo Dillenius in the third edition. He is the firfl who added 
the fynonymous appellations of other authors, but unfortunately 
fixed upon thefe three, Clufius, J. Bauhin, and G.Bauhin, neither of 
whom meant the fame plant as he did, or the I'nfol. medium ; but, 
on the contrary, Xh^ aipejire\ efpecially the two firfl, as is mentioned 
above. 

After 



three Species of Thfcihwh 215 

After Ray, this Trifolium was mentioned by Ruppius, Tonrne- 
fort, Boerhaave, Van Royen, Halicr, Willbn, Scopoli, Hill, and 
Hudfon; and the fe are the only writers I have found noticing it, 
before Linnasiis named it. Tournefoit and Boerhaave only quoted 
Ray, and mentioned his plant as feparate from 'Trifolium tnontanum 
furpuremn majus^ C. B. which latter, confequently, they could not 
take for the medium, but rather for the alpefire^ where, if it v/crc to 
be cited at all, it ought to have its doubtful place. With refpe6l to 
Ruppius, Van Royen, Haller, and Scopoli, I have already faid what 
I thought neceHary, and that they have all miftaken it for the 
alpefire\ at leaft in this refpedl, that under it they generally quoted 
fuqh authors as meant the alpefire. The fame is done by Wilfon 
and Hill ; who, moreover, only copied what they found in the 
third edition of Ray's Synopfis. 

Mr. Hudfon, in his firft Flora Anglica, called it Trfol. medium, 
giving it a new chara6ler, and adding the doubtful quotation of G. 
Bauhin, as well as the true one of Ray. Mr. Hudfon did not then, 
know that Linnaeus, a year ago, had given it the fame name in his 
Novitix Florse Suecicae, which are fubjoined at the end of the 
fecond edition of his Fauna Suecica. At all events, it was not eafy 
to difcover what Linnaeus meant ; as he neither added charadter nor 
defcription, and afterwards neither mentioned the Trif medium any 
where in his works, nor referred to this place in the Noviti^. The 
extrication of this would alfo have been impoflible to any but 
Swedes who could go to Jumkil, where he fays this Trifolium 
grows. This place, which is famous for the number of its rare 
plants, is fituated about thirteen miles from Upfal. I have vifited 
it, and found there the Trif medium, Befides, I have feen it under 
the fame name, by the authority of Linnaeus, in all old Swediih 
Herbariums, and efpecially in his own. Further, as it is in fome 

mpalure 



2i6 Mk. AfzeliusV Accoimt of 

meafure a mediam fpecies betvv^een the alpejlre and fraienfe^ I think 
I have reafon to prefer the oldeft name, and which was given by 
Linnreus himfelf ; though he afterwards changed it for alpefire^ or 
rather confounded thefe two fpecies. Hence he lays, in the fecond 
edition of Species Plantarum, that T^nfoUuin alpejlre grows alfo in 
Sweden ; whereas no other than the medium is found there. 

It appears as if Linn^us had been led into this miftake by the 
ftipulx', which in both are fimilar, and very different from thofe of 
Trifol. pratenfe^ though in other refpe6ls the alpejlre and medium have 
few things in common. However, it feems as if fucceeding botanifts 
had generally regarded the 'TrJJ'oL mediura as the alpcftrey and con- 
founded the fynonyms of both; whereas, neverthelefs, properly 
fpeaking, the medium has neither caulis ere6lusy nov folia lanceolatafer- 
rulata. But having in various authors obferved various notions of 
thefe and other terms, this no longer appears fnigular to me. At all 
events it is certain that the T^rifol alpefre of all the Engliih bota- 
nifts, of Crantz, Scopoli, PoUich, Leers, Muller, Retzius, Lieblein, 
?ind perhaps alfo of GmeUn, Scholler, Mattufchka, Reichard, and 
Willdenow, is no other than the iJrifoL medium ; for I am informed 
that this latter only, and not the former, grows in England and 
Scotland, as Dr. Stokes has before obferved ; and the fame I can 
fay of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway. Befides, the figure of 
Muller plainly evinces that his TJrifol alpefre is the medium. 

That Crantz, Scopoli, Pollich, Leers, and Lieblein have made 
the fame miftake, is evident from their defcriptions, as with regard 
to the two firft I have fhewn above ; and, as to the three latter 
authors, they compare their Trifolium with the pratenfe, fayino- 
that its ftem is for the moft part deprefled, or almoft lying on the 
ground (efpecially at the bafes), fomewhat angular, and furnillied 
with joints; the leaves are feldom fpotted, and are on the under 

fide 



three Species of Trifolium. 217 

fide of a lighter green ; the flowers of a deeper purple, and the 
fpikes nearly globular. Pollich and Leers add, that they are larger, 
and generally fhorter, or have longer peduncles, particularly when 
grown old; and that the calyx is moftly without hair, and marked 
with red-brown lines or nerves. But when Leers further adds, that 
Xh.Q.foliola are linear i-lanceolat a ^ and calycis denies brevijfmii, ifTfimo tubo 
corollcc dimidio breviore, the former obfervation fuits better with TrifoL 
alpejire^ and the latter with I'rifoL praienfe, Lieblein has likewife 
made this remark on the teeth of the calyx, namely, that they are 
very fhort, ^ .^. ^^ 

SchoUer in his Flora, and Mattufchka in his Enumeratio, have 
only copied what Linnasus has faid iu the twelfth edition of his 
Syflem, under the head of Trifol. alpejlre ; but Gmelin in his Stirp. 
Tubing., Reichard in his Flora, and Willdenow, have no defcrip- 
tion at all. In his Flora, Mattufchka has indeed faid many pretty 
things; all of which, however, are equally applicable to alpejlre and 
to medium. Thus it is impoflible to determine, with any degree of 
certainty, what fpecies the Trifolium of thefe authors really is; but, 
if I am not much miftaken, they have all intended the medium. 
This, however, I only fay by way of conje6lure, leaving it to time 
further to elucidate this matter. 

With regard to Gorter, who inferted the Trifolium of Ray as a 
variety of pratenfe\ nor with regard to Nonne and Gattenhof, who 
have mentioned trifolium Jpicis villojis foliis injldentibus^ 'vaginarum 
caudis latioribusy Hall, and added the often- mentioned and doubt- 
ful fynonyms of G . Bauhin and Van Roy en ; nor, laftly, with 
regard to Jenkinfon, who has taken up Trifol. medium probably 
from Mr. Hudfon, and only tranflated the character he gave of it 
into Englifh — have I much more to fay. Though all thefe authors 
have no defcription, Nonne excepted, who has added that inaccu- 

F f rate 



2l8 Mr. AfzeliusV Hi/lory of 

rate obfervation of Haller's, out of his edition of Ruppius's Flora 
Jencnfis, of which I have made mention above, viz. that the 
vagma petiolorum jioralium are broader than thofe of the T^rifol. pra- 
tenfe ; it ftill feems probable to me, that they all meant the 'Trifol, 
medium. 

At laft Profeflbr Jacquin has given us information concern- 
ing this Trifolium, by means of a feparate defcription, and a good 
figure of it, in his Flora Auftriaca, where he calls it jlexuofum. 
But, though fifteen years have novvelapfed fince its pubhcation, ftill 
1 have found none but the Chevalier Murray, Profefibr Allioni, 
and Dr. Stokes, who have referred to it. The firft of them has 
placed it under alpefire, though there were juft as good reafons for 
making this a diftin6t fpecies as many other new plants which he 
has inferted in the fourteenth edition of the Syftem. Profeflbr 
Allioni has faid no more concerning it, than that it grows in Pied- 
mont, and has an annual root; which remark furprifes me the more, 
as it is defcribed by all others to be perennial; a circumftance I can 
prove by my own experience. Dr. Stokes has given us pretty good 
obfervations on the fubjeft, collected from various quarters. Befides 
thefe three authors, no others who have written after the publica- 
tion of Profeflbr Jacquin's figure, have attended to it, although 
they have meant the fame plant. Some of them had perhaps not 
then feen this figure, but all cannot plead this excufe. 

Thus, though Profeflbr Jacquin is the firfl: who has given us a 
proper idea of '^r'lf. medtumt and taught us to feparate it from the real 
alpeflre^ fl:ill I cannot conceive but that he has confounded it, at the 
fame time, with another equally diftin6l fpecies: for he has quoted 
as fynonymous TirlfoUum majus iii, Cluf. and, to the befl: of my 
judgment, this is the rubens j8. For this I will give my reafons, 
which I fhall chiefly take from the very defcription of Clufius. 

He 



three Specks of Trifolium. 219 

He fays of this Trefoil of his, that it is by far larger than the next 
preceding, viz. the alpejlre\ that it has alfo thicker flems; that its 
leaves 'eccQjtnatay dorfo magis eminent eet elaio, laxa quadam vclutl vagina 
caulem ample^entia^ duplo longiora et per oras denticulata ; and, laftly, 
that the fpike is oblonglor and major. All this, and efpecially what 
he fays of vaginae and foliola, does by no means agree with 'Tr'ifoh 
medium. He mentions, indeed, at the fame time, that the ftalks 
are nodoji.^ or have genicular and that the calyx is hairy; but by the 
firft I do not believe he underftands any flexure but the joints 
(nodi)^ which in the Trifol. rubens are larger than in any other, 
owing apparently to the very large, and as it were inflated, vagina 
of the flipulas. And as to the latter obfervation, the calyx of the 
trifol. rubens is indeed always naked ; but fo is, for the moft part 
alfo, that of the medium. Still both of them have hairs on the teeth 
of the calyx ; but the rubens has thofe hairs both longer and in 
greater abundance ; which, being divaricated, almofl: cover the 
calyx, fo that at firft fight it appears to be all over hairy. Clufius 
therefore may. be excufed for thus defcribing it. 

This author immediately after fubjoins his TrifoUi majoris iii al^ 
tera /pedes, of which he only obferves, that vel magnitudine vel foli- 
orum et jlorum forma aut colore^ nihil aut quam minimum differ t. Folia 
tamen angujiiora illorum longitudinem aliquantum exccdere videntur^ et forum 
fpica longior ejfe. This being by common confent Trifol. rubens a, the 
next preceding can be no other than the variety (i. For it is not 
probable that Clufms, who for his time was very accurate, fhould 
have found fo great a likenefs between two plants fo different as 
Trifol, rubens and medium are. Befides, as he has four fpecies of his 
Trifol, majus, which he compares together, faying that, as to their 
external appearance, they are all flmilar; the chain will be unin- 
terrupted, if they are fuppofed to be Tnfolium montanum, or perhaps 

F f 2 panuGnicum^ 



^20 Mr. Afzelius'j Hijlory of 

pannonicum, alpejre, rubens /5} and rubens a ; but it will be broken if, 
inftead of rubens (2, the medium is inferted, whole form and appear- 
ance are very different from all the other three. It is true, the 
figure of his Trifolium majus iii. feems rather to refemble the medium 
than the rubens, being hairy and fomewhat branched. But the 
fame may be faid of his figure of Trifolii majoris iii altera /pedes : 
and thus neither of thefe figures of Glufius can be taken for I'nfoL 
rubens, or elfe both of them muft. I believe, however, the latter 
opinion is the fafeft, as his defcriptions fo well agree with TrifoL 
rubens, and as it is not yet perfectly certain whether this plant 
does not at times become branched. Laftly, as to the hairs which 
Clufius has reprefented in the edge of his figures, I believe they 
are rather meant to reprefent their fine teeth, than any hairinefs. 

Having endeavoured to prove that the Trifolmm majus iii of 
Clufius ought to be confidered as the fecond variety of TnfoL ru~ 
bens with broader leaves and fhorter fpikes, I ihall conclude by 
citing a few fynonyms, as an addition to thofe quoted in the pre- 
ceding article of TrifoL alpejire, Thefe are — 

Trifolium maximum purpureo fiore. Cluf. Pann. p. 760, 
n. _3. * Et Trifolium majus iii. Ibid, p» 762. Et ejufd, 
Hjft, vi. p, 245, n, iii *. 

Trifolium fpica oblonga rubra. Bauh, Pin» p. 328. Ray^ 
Hiji. i. p, 944, «. 7. * 

Trifolium purpureum majus, folio et fpica breviore. Bauh, 
Hift. ii. p, 375, fg, inf, 

Trifolium majus tertium purpureum, Clufio. Bauh. Hiji, 

ii- P' 375- * 

The figure of John Bauhin, as well as thofe of Gerarde, Par- 

kinfon, and Morifon, as already mentioned, are only re-imprefTions 

of the original of Clufius, whofe defer iption is like wife copied in 

6 part 



three Species of Trifolium, 221 

part by Grerarde and Parkinfon, but entirely by Ray, Morifon, and 
J. Bauhin in the lafl-mentioned place, where it is not accompa- 
nied by a figure. But this the author has inferted in the former 
place along with the figure of 'Trifol. rubens «, which variety he 
has alfo defcribed there himfelf. Dr. Stokes, after the example of 
ProfefTor Jacquin, has quoted under his TrifoUum flexuofum^ not only 
the figure of Clufius, but alfo thofe of Gerarde, Parkinfon, and J. 
Bauhin, to which he has added another by Parkinfon, which re- 
prefents the upper part of Trifol pannonicum^ or elfe the montanum, 

T R I F O L I U M P R A T E N S E. 

Although we have but few figures of TrifoL alpejlre and medium^ 
viz. three of the former and two oi the latter, thofe of the fraienfe 
are more numerous. If I were to fay I had feen upwards of 
fixty myfelf, it might perhaps, true as it is, found extravagant. Of 
thefe, fifteen or fixteen may be efl:eemed originals, and all the 
others either copies, or only re-imprelTions from the fame plates of 
thofe publifhed before. This lafl was moft cuflomary in the two 
lafl centuries. And thus thefe figures conflitute feveral fets, 
which I Ihall briefly touch on, adding a few obfervations on their 
merit, and how far they may deferve to be quoted. 

In an old book called Ortus Sanitatis, printed at Venice, 1426, 
in folio, appears a Trifolium, which I fuppofe to be meant for the 
pratenfe ; though, from the barbarifm of thofe times, both figure 
and defcription are fo indifferent, that nothing certain can be af- 
firmed refpefting them. In the defcription, feveral fpecies certainly 
are confounded ; and the figure, though the foliola refemble 
thofe of ^rlf'oL pratenfe, and the fpike is fefTile between the floral 
leaves, flill erroneoufly reprefents two oppofite leaves nearly in the 
middle of the ftem. In a later edition of this book, publiihed 15 17, 

occurs 



222r Mr. AfzeliusV Hlflory of 

occurs the fame figure and defcription. In the third tome of 
Brunfelfii Herbarium, printed in Latin at Strafburg, 1536, in folio, 
1 have feen another and better figure; which, under the name of 
Brunella, feems to reprefent TrifoL pratenfe. Still the figure is not 
diflinct enough to enable me to judge of it with abfolute cer- 
tainty. 

But the firft evident figure of this Trifolium that I have feen, 
is found in Roefslin's Herbal, printed in German, at Frankfort on 
the Mayne, by Egenolphus, 1532, in folio. It is fmall, but re- 
prefents the plant tolerably with one fingle ftem, with proper 
leaves, and a feffile fpike. Of this figure I have found thirteen re- 
imprcflions, which are in Egenolphi Imagines et Effigies, a work 
which contains only figures, and of the former of which there are 
three editions ; in Dorftenii Botanicon, in two places, under the 
name both of Kphhymum and Trifolium ; in both the Latin editions 
of Diofcorides by RyfFor Rivius; and in the Hiftory of Lonicerus 
in Latin, as alfo in his German Herbal, of which I have feen two 
editions, under UfFenbach's namej and in this century, another by 
Ehrhart. The figures of Egenolphus and Rivius, as alfo thofe of 
Lonicerus himfclf, are hi "general coloured. 

Fuchfen, or, as he is more commonly called, Fuchfius, in his 
Hiftory in Latin, printed at Bafil, 1542, in folio, gave us a new 
and a good figure of this Trifolium, reprefented in its natural fize 
and pofition, with feveral flems ; and it is not much to our ho- 
nour that this is ftill almoft the beft extant. The only thing 
that might be faid againft it, is, that a few of the fpikes are repre- 
fented pedunculated, and the floral leaves are not always oppofite 
and feffile, as they ought to be. Of this figure we have a coloured 
re-imprefTion in the German Herbal of this author; of which af- 
ter\vards, firft Tragus in his Hiftory, and after him Dodonacus in 

his 



three Species of TrifoUum* 2£ 



D 



his Imagines, have each given us a copy on a fmaller fcale, en- 
graved fo that the figure is reverfed. Neither of them can be called 
good, but that of Dodonasus is the beft ; and of this we find a re- 
impreflion in the fecond edition of his Imagines, as alfo in the 
French, Dutch, and Englifh tranflations of his Pemptades, and in 
both editions of Turner's Herbal. At laft John Bauhin, in his 
Hiftory, has given us a new and fmall copy of the figure of Fuchfius, 
altered for the worfe, though not reverfed. 

Matthiolus, in his Commentary on Diofcorides, publilhed 
in Latin at Venice, 1554, in folio, began a new fet of figures- 
He reprefents the plant, diminifhed, pretty well, with many 
ftems from the fame root ; but, as to the floral leaves, he has 
committed the fame fault with Fuchfius, and rather in a 
greater degree. It appears to me as if he had had the figure of the 
latter by him when he made his own, for they have an imperfe6t 
refemblance to each other, except that the figure of Matthiolus 
has the points of the foliola rounder, and the fpikes longer. This 
figure has afterwards been reprinted, or with more or lefs va- 
riation copied, in various works. Exa61: re-impreffions of it I have 
feen in the fecond Latin edition of the Commentary of Matthiolus, 
in the Latin Compendium of the fame author, in the French 
tranflation by Moulin, and the Italian one by Collantini, and 
another later in the fame language; further, in the Hiftoria Lug- 
dunenfis, which Linnaeus calls Dalechampii, and the French tranf- 
lation of it ; and, laftly, in the Diofcorides in Spanilh, by De La- 
guna. It mull be remarked that Matthiolus, in his Compendium, 
has committed two errors ; firft, in tranfpofing the figures of 
^rifoL pratenje and montanum ; and, fecondly, that in the defcription 
belonging to the latter, but inferted under the former, he mentions 
it as having purple flowers. 

Of 



224 ¦^^^* AfzeliusV Hljlory of 

Of the copies of Matthiolus's figures I have feen three kinds. 
A larger one, ii\ the Latin edition of his Commentary, in 1565, 
fomewhat improved, and reprefenting the plant nearly in its na- 
tural fize : this has been copied in the Italian tranflations of this 
work, in the years 1568 and 1604. Secondly, one of the fame fize 
with the original, in the Latin Epitome of Matthiolus, by Game- 
rarius ; but inferior in this refpe6l, that all the fpikes are repre- 
fented oval, and pedunculated, orwithout floral leaves. Neverthelefs 
it has been reprinted by UfFenbach in his German tranflation of 
Durantes's Herbario, by Becker in his Parnaffus, and by Zvinge- 
rus in his Theatrum, both of them in German. Thirdly, one 
kind much fmaller than the original one, but otherwife perfectly 
fi milar, found in the French tranflations of Matthiolus's Com- 
mentary, by Pinet. Camerarius has altered one of the above- 
mentioned faults committed by Matthiolus in his Compendium, 
and reftored the figures of Trifol, pratenfe and montanum to their 
right places ; but he has retained the other, faying, that TrifoL 
montanum has purple flowers. 

Another fet of figures of the T^rifol, pratenfe originated with 
Tabern:L'montanus, in his Herbal, printed in German at Frankfort 
on the Mayne, 1588, in folio. His figure is of the fame fize as 
the original or firft one by Matthiolus, to which it bears fome re- 
femblance; but is better in this refped, that all the fpikes are fur- 
nifhed with clofe floral leaves, which however rather appear to 
reprefent a large calyx than real leaves. Re-impreffions of this 
figure I have feen in eight places, viz. in Tabernsemontani Icones, 
and four later editions of his Herbal, the firft of which was pub- 
lifhed by Gafper Bauhin, and afterwards reprinted; the third by 
Hieron. Bauhin, likewife reprinted in this century ; further in 
Gerarde's Herbal, and in Cafper Bauhin's edition of the Commen- 
tary 



ihree Specks of TnfoUunu 225 

tary of Matthiolus in Latin, of which I have {0.^x1 a fubfequent 
edition. 

The ten remaining figures of T'rifol. pratenfe are all to be regardecT 
as originals, and are publilhed by Rivinus, Zannichelli, the author 
of Spe£lacle de la Nature, Blackwell, Weinman, Kniphof, Knorr, 
Regnault, Zorn, and ProfefTor Vahl. All thcfe are genuine in this 
refpeft — that they are intended to reprefentthe honey-fuckle Tre- 
foil, as is evident from their pofture, ftipulae, foliola, and clofe 
floral leaves, &c. But that of Kniphof is, as ufual, a very poor 
one ; which indeed I would have pafTed over in filence, but that 
it has been referred to by more than one author. The figures of 
Zannichelli, Weinman, and Zorn are fomewhat better; and thofe 
of Blackwell and Regnault tolerably good: but both thefe 
authors, as well as Zorn, have been unfortunate in reprefenting 
the fegments of the calyx very different from nature. The figures 
of Rivinus and Knorr are pretty good. That in Spe6l. de la 
Nature is an indifferent one, and appears to be made from 
the cultivated variety : indeed it is pity that the otherwife good 
figure of ProfefTor Vahl feems to be alfo drawn from a 
cultivated fpecimen; for the whole of its poflure nearly ap- 
proaches to that of T'r/fol. mediufn, the leaves being too much 
pointed to reprefent the wild plant. But its principal diftin- 
guiihing chara6lerLftics, the broad and awned flipulx, as well as 
the fefTile fpike placed between two oppofite ternate feifile leaves, 
are very well expreffed. f rij -- 

Of all the figures now mentioned, Linnaeus himfelf has 
quoted none but that of Camerarius, in both editions of the 
Flora Suecica and Species Plantarum ; that of John Bauhin 
only in Hortus ClifFortianus ; and that of Rivinus alone in 
his firft Flora. To particularize which of thefe figures a.11 

G g other 



226 Mr. AfzeliusV Hiftory of 

other authors have referred to, would be too tedious ; it fuffices 
to mention, that I have feen a few of each fet quoted, but, 
what is furprifing, moftly thofe of inferior merit ; whereas 
the good one of Fuchiius has been in this century quoted by no 
one but Haller and Dr. Stokes. 

It feems, therefore, that the TrifoL pratenfe, as having been 
knov\^n from the earheft ages, and being one of the mod common 
plants in Europe, ought to have been exempt from the confufion 
in which many others are involved, and which is more excufable 
when fome rare or lefs known plant is in queftion. Still it flands 
unfortunately in the fame predicament ; and Cafpar Bauhin, ac- 
cording to his ufual pra6lice, began the confufion : for his "Trifo- 
Hum pratenfe purptireum^v;fiXh his perplexed defcription and mifplaced 
citations, comprehends at lead three diflin<5l fpecies, befides the 
genuine pratenfe ; under which laft his TnfoUum pratenfe purpureum 
is generally quoted by moft authors, who thereby have authorifed 
the blunder of Bauhin, not to mention other feparate miftakes 
committed by fome of them. I therefore efteem it necefTary in this 
place to enumerate all the plants which I have found miflaken 
for the 'J'rifol. pratenfe^ or confounded with it. But I fhall previoufly 
fpeak of 

Trifolium pratenfe purpureum minus, foliis cordatis. Rayi 
Syn. iii. p. 328, n. 5. * tab. 13, fig. i. 

This Haller has introduced as a different fpecies in his Stirp. 
Helv. p. 585, n. 13*, but in his Hift. i. p. 164, n. 378*, he has 
inferted it as a variety of another Trefoil, which certainly is the 
ochroleucum ; and on the other hand adduced the authors really be- 
longing to this latter, under 'Tr'tfoJ, pratenfe^ as I am going to ob- 
ferve. Linnaeus, probably mifled by Haller, has alfo brought in 
this plant of Ray's, under his TrifoL ochroleucum, in Syft, Nat. 

torn. 



three Species of 'trifolium, 22y 

torn. iii. p. 233. * But the Englifh botanifls, who ought to be 
better acquainted with it, feparate it from the Trifol. ochrohucuniy 
fince, befides other differences, it has purple flowers; and they make 
it a variety of Trifol. pratenfey on account of its having a fimilar, 
though ftarved appearance; the ftipulas being in hke manner 
awned, and the teeth of the calyx hkewife nearly equal, as Dr. 
Sibthorp and Mr. Hudfon have informed me. But it differs in 
other refpe6ls very materially; having the leaves oppofite ; the fo- 
liola fmall, ihort, and inverfely heart-fhaped ; and the peduncle 
very long, and deftitute of floral leaves. 

The other plants that have been confounded with I'rifol. pra^^ 
tenfej though widely differing from it, are the following, viz. 

I. Melampyrum arvenfe. 

"¦' Trifolium majus. Bnwf. Herb, torn. iii. p. 47. 
This paffage in Brunfels, Cafpar Bauhin has quoted under his 
trifolium pratenfe purpureum. But to judge from the figure annexed, 
for there is no fuch thing as defcription, the plant is by no means 
any Trefoil, though called fo, but certainly a Melampyrum ; as 
John Bauhin has already remarked in his Hifl:oria, tom. ii. p. ^j^, 
and which Haller in his Stirp. Helv. p. 626y n. 2, has taken for 
the arvenfe, which indeed it appears to be. This figure of Brun- 
fels's is a re-impreffion of one in his Herb, ii- p. 58, where it has 
only obtained a German name. 

2. Tr folium repens, 

Trifolium pratenfe. Lob. Adv. p. 380. Hift, p. 493. (ed. 

Lat. 1576.) P. ii. p. 35. (ed. Belg. 158 1.) Icon. ii. p. 

29. Dodod. Pempt. p. 556. (ed. 1583.) p. 565. (ed. 1616.) 

et p. 898. (ed. Belg. 1644.) Ger. Emac, p. 1185, n. i. 

'\ G g 2 Trifolium 



22S Mr. Afzelius'j Hijiory of 

Trifolium pratenfe vulgare purpureum. Parh 'Theair, 
p. mo, n. I. 

Lobel, in his Adverfaria, has indeed no figure; and gives a de- 
fcription which comprehends at lead two fpecies, the Trlfol. repens 
and pratenfe. But that he chiefly had the repens in view, appears 
from his fubfequent Hiftoria or Obfervationes, in which he has 
given a pretty good figure of this plant, and at the fame time re- 
ferred to the above-mentioned Adverfaria. Of this original figure 
by Lobel, re-imprefTions have afterwards been made in all the above 
works. It bears fo near a refemblance to the 'Tr'ifoL repens^ as to 
leave us no room to doubt : and for this reafon it appears to me 
the more furprifing, that fo many both ancient and modern authors 
could refer to it for the pratenfe, which it in no manner refembles. 
Thus I have feen Lobel cited by Cafpar and John Bauhin, by Mori- 
fon, by Haller, in Stirp. Helv. and by Knorr; Dodon:EUS by Haller, 
both in his Stirpes and Hiftoria, by Linnasus, in both the editions 
of Flora Suecica,, by Gorter, in both the editions of Flora Belgica, 
by Knorr, in his Thefaurus, by Mr. Hudfon, in the laft edition of 
Flora Anglica, and by Profeftor Vahl, in Flora Danica ; Gerarde 
by Mr. Hudion, in both the editions of his Flora, and by the Rev. 
Mr. Relhan, in the Flora Cantabrigienfis ; and, laftly, Parkinfon 
by Ray, both in his Hiftoria, and in all the three editions of his 
Synopfis, by Haller, in his Stirpes, by Wilfon, Hill, and Mr. 
Hudfon, in both places. 

Haller happened firft, either by an error in writing or printing, 
to mifquote the laft Latin edition of Dodonaci Pemptades, viz. 
p. 365 inftcad of 565 ; and, after him, this fault has been invariably 
copied by all the above-mentioned authors, except Gorter, who 
altered it in the laft edition of his Flora Belgica. Haller alfo re- 
commends the figure by Dodonseus as a good one, but Crantz cri- 

ticifes 



three Species of 'Tnfolium. 229 

ticifes it as bad; and Dr. Stokes is the firft who has remarked 
that this, as well as thofe by Lobel, Gerarde, and Parkinfon, does 
not belong to I'rifol. pratenfe, but to repens. 

Gerarde, in his Herbal, has a genuine figure as well as dcfcription 
of 'Trifol, pratenfe ; the former taken from Tabernsemontanus, as I 
have faid above. But Johnfon, who publillied a new, and, as him- 
felf called it, improved edition of Gerarde, thought this figure not 
good enough ; and therefore inferted in its room the figure above 
cited, which represents the ^nfoL repens^ and is borrowed either 
from Lobel or Dodonaeus ; at the fame time retaining Gerarde's 
defcription : and thus unluckily confounded plants fo different as 
the creeping and purple Trefoil are. Parkinfon, who afterwards 
publilhed his Theatrum, copied the lad edition of Gerarde ; and, 
as he faw the flowers were there defcribed purple, he thought it 
beft to infert that circumftance in the very title : by this means 
the white ^rifoj, repens came to be called by him purpureum, 

3. 'TrifoUum ochroleucum, 

Trifolium montanum majus, flore albo fulphureo. Meir, 

Pin, p. 121. 
Trifolium lagopoides annuum hirfutum, pallide luteum 

feu ochroleucum. Mor. H'ljl, ii. p. 141, n. 12. * Et 

Trifolium lagopoides, fl. ochroleuco. Ibid, fe6t» 2, tab. 

12, fig. 12. 
Trifolium pratenfe hirfutum majus, flore albo fulphureo 

feu ochroleuco. Kay. Hiji. i. p. 943, n. 8. ^ Et Syn, 

iii. p. 328, n. 3. * 
,\ i .,:,i.. Triphylloides alpina, flore albo. Ponied. Anthol. p. 241.* 
Trifolium Lagopoides flore fubluteo. VailU Par, p. 195, 

n. 5. 

AH 



S30 Mr. Afzeliusj Hljlory of 

All thefe five authors Haller has quoted in his Stirp. Helv. 
p. 586, under var. /S? Acre albo of T'rijoL pratenfe. But in his Hif- 
tory, torn. i. p. 164, he has only cited Moriibn and Ray under var. cT, 
flore ochroleuco, of the fame Trefoil. Of this laft, Linnaeus alfo 
in the beginning confidered the plant of Pontedera to be a variety, 
as appears from his Flora Lapponica and Hortus GlifFortianus ; 
but afterwards he juftly omitted this quotation. 

That Merrett's Trifolium is the ochrckucum^ is very probable from 
its being a native of England ; and that Ray meant the fame, is 
evident beyond doubt from bis defcription : but with refpedt to 
Morifon, the matter is not fo clear ; for both his defcription, in 
which occur the terms folia acuta, and his figure, which reprefents 
the leaves narrow, lanceolate, and pointed inftead of rounded at 
the ends, appear rather to indicate the Trifol. pannontcum^ though 
the fpecimen in Bobart's colle6lion at Oxford is "Trifol, ocbroleucum. 
It is far more difficult to make out what Pontedera aimed at ; for, 
from his prolix defcription, nothing further can be concluded, 
than that the leaves, principally in the margin, as well as the whole 
calyx, are hairy; the flowers white and monopetalous ; and that 
the feed-veilcls generally contain one feed. Hence it follows, how- 
ever, that his plant can neither be Trifol, rcpens nor mGutanum : 
and, independent of thefe two, I can thinli of no other capable of 
being called in queftion, except the Trifol, ochroleucum and pannoni- 
cum. But, as the above-mentioned charaflers aix equally applica- 
ble to both of them, and as thefe two laft-mentioned plants them- 
felves are fo nearly related as to be fcarcely diftinguiihable but by 
their fize, and the ihape of their leaves, it is impoflible to determine 
which of,them Pontedera had in view. The plant of Vaillant is 
flill more difficult to afcertain, for he has given no defcription at 
all. 

4. 2r;- 



three Species of Tri folium. 



IVi 



4. J'r folium montanum, 
Trifolium pratenfe ii. Dur, Herb. p. 10 14. (^ed. Germ, 
Ufenbach. 1619. Franc, ad Moen. 4°.) 

This Trefoil, which undoubtedly is the montanum^ C. Bauhin 
has quoted under his 'Trifolium prate?fe purpureum. But as he is in 
every refpe6l inaccurate, he has termed it Trifolium pratenfe alterum\ 
and called his author by his Chriftian name Cafiore^ inftead of his 
furname Durante. 

In all old authors, the TrifoL montanum always follows after 
t]\Q pratenfe, under the name of album or acutum, or elfe, which is 
the mofl common, pratenfe alterum or pratenfe album : and the 
figures of it have likewife had the fame fate and changes, as I have 
before mentioned of thofe of the pratenfe. However, the montanum 
was not fo early known; for it does not occur in Roefslin's Herbal, 
nor in the firft edition of Egenolphi Imagines, or of Loniceri Hif- 
toria. Among this fet of figures it appears for the firft time in 
RyfF's edition of Diofcorides, printed at Frankfort on the Mayne, 
by Egenolphus, in 1543, ^^^^*^ • otherwife, the firft figure I have 
ieen of it is in Fuchfii Hiftoria pubhftied the preceding year. This 
is not only good, but the beft of thofe that have fallen under my 
infpe6lion. 

While on the fubje^t of TrifoL montanum^ I muft not pafs over 
in filence the careleflhefs of C. Bauhin with refpetSl to this plant, 
as indeed to almoft all others : for he has quoted Trifolium majus 
i. CUiJ, Pann. p. 761, and Hjfi. v'u p. 245, both under his Tr folium 
montanum album. Pin. p. 328, which probably is the genuine monta- 
num \ and under his Trifolium pratenfe album. Pin. p. 327, which all 
authors have taken for the repens. Further, under this his Trifo- 
lium pratenfe album, he has cited Fuchfius, Matthiolus, Lonicerus, 
Turner, Gamerarius, and Laguna, all of whom certainly meant the 
5 "Trifoh 



232 ^Tr. AfzeliusV Hlflory of 

'Trifol. montanum ; Lobelil Adverfaria, and Thalius, who appear to 
have had the repens in view, at leafh Lobel ; Durante, who has 
drawn the 'TrifrA. pratenfe ; and, laftly, Tragus and Dodonaeus, who 
on this fubjecl are fo inexpHcit, that I cannot determine their 
meaning. The qneflion is then, where is the Trifolium praienfe 
album of Bauhin to be quoted, whether under repens, pratenfe^ or 
montatiumf I think, mod probably under the laft-mentioned, if at 
all; as mofl of the authors quoted by him had this fpecies in view. 

5. Trlfollum^ an incarnaium f 
Trifolium pratenfe purpureum vulgare. Mor. Hj/l. ii. pi- 
138, n. 5. * Et Trifolium pratenfe purpureum. Ibid, 
fed:. 2, tab. T2, fig. 6. 
This plant of Morifon's, generally taken for 'TrifoL pratenfe, I 
have feen cited in three different manners. Boerhaave in the fecond 
edition of his Hortus Lugdunenfis, Haller in his Stirp. Helv. and 
Seguier in his Plantae Veronenfes, mention the page without 
taking notice of the figure ; whereas Lightfoot and Relhan only 
refer to the figure. Linnaeus quotes both. 

As Morifon under the defcription has not diredled us to the figure,^ 
nor at thefaid figure referred to the body of the work for a defcription 
of it, we are very uncertain whether in thofe two places he had the 
fame plant in view. His confufed defcription, which is for the mofl 
part borrowed from C. Bauhin, affords but trifling orratherno infor- 
mation. And although Morifon, in thus confounding feveral fpecies 
together, may ft ill have meant to point at the true T'rfol. pratenfe, yet 
his figure will by no means fuit that plant; but ratherrefemblesTr//^/. 
incarnatum, and perhaps it is even drawn from this fpecies: but, if fo, 
it betraysgreatcarelefTnefs in Morifon, who has, in two places befides, 
defcribed and drawn the laft-mentioned Trefoil ; viz. under Trfo- 

Hum 



three Species of 'TrifoUum, 233 

Hum purpureum et annuum^ folio hlrfuto rotundo^ Trifolti praknfis albl 
forma, Mor. Hid. ii. p. 140, n. 3. '^'- Et TrifoL lagcpoides "frlfolu 
pratenfis folloy Ibid. {gB:. 2, tab. 12, fig. 3. And under Trifolium 
purpureum lagopoides hlrfutum annuum rotundlfoUumy fplca dilute rubente^ 
Mor. Hift. ii. p, 140, n. 6. * Et 'Tr folium lagopoides rotundif hlrfut. 
Ibid. fe6t. 2, tab. 13, fig. 6, a leaf only. The complete figure re- 
prefents 'TrifoL angufifoUum, This Linnseus has not quoted ; but 
the whole of the pafTage immediately preceding, which belongs to 
Trlfol. Incarnatum^ he has infertcd under his TrifoL fquarrofum. 

Finding myfelf unable to extricate this conMcd Trifolium prafenfe 
purpureum of Morifon's, I wrote a letter fome time ago to Profeflfor 
Sibthorp at Oxford, afking the favour of him to examine the old 
Herbariums under his care, in order to difcover whether they might 
not throw fome light on the matter. His anfvv^r is as follows : 
*' The plant in Bobart's Herbarium, under this title of Morifon's, 
*' is TrifoL ochroleucumi which, however, as I never faw it with 
** purple flowers, I can fcarcely think Morifon meant. But there 
*"* is a pafTage in the defcription of his Trifolium lagopoides an- 
'^ nuum hirfutum pallide luteum feu ochroleucum, p. 141, n. 12, 
" which fecms to point at his Trifolium pratenfe purpureum ; 
*' namely, f^lde ejufdem iconem in tab. duodecima, ante lagopoides penna- 
*' iUMy et refer hue propter coloremy extra gregem TrifoUorum fpicatorum 
'^ feu lagopoideorum flore purpurea illic donatorum. The figure I confefs 
" has a confiderable refemblance to that of Trifol. incarnatum; 
<* but this has an annual, not a perennial, root.'* 

6. Tr I folium ml hi Ignotum, 

Trifolium pratenfe. GmeL Tubing, p. 227.* 
This is quoted by Reichard in his Syftema Plantarum ; but as 
Gmelin fays that it has cauiis procumhem^ folia lanceolata, and capi- 

H h //////;;/ 



Jt34 Mr. Afzelius'j Hijlory of 

tulum foil tar mm aut geminum, there is reafon to doubt its being 
Trifol, praienfe\ but when he further adds, that it hdisftpula lineares 
erenati^^ it is evident he cannot mean this (pecies. Had he not at 
the fame time made feparatc mention of T'rfoL rubens, I fliould 
have fuppofed he here hinted at it under the wrong name of pra-- 
ienfe. At leaft I do not for my part know of any other fpecies with, 
erenated ftipulas,. which GmeUn can poffibly have intended. 

^^ "T* "W^ "ff "V ^TV "SJ^ 

HAVING thus finifhed the hiftory of the TrfoUum alpefrey, 
medium, and pratenfe, and pointed out with what plants they 
have in former, as well as prefent times, been confounded, it re- 
mains for me to defcribe them botanically, and under each to 
infert the proper fynonyms. With a view of duly diftinguifhing, 
the I'rfoL alpejlre and medium^ which have always been miftaken 
for one another, I fhall bring in all the authors I have feen that 
mention them. But with refpe6t; to 'Trifol. praienfe, 1 think I need 
only take notice of thofe who have either figures or defcriptions, 
or who have been cited by Linnaeus and Reichard ; and yet their 
number is fo very great, that I almoft fear to mention them. In 
order to prevent all further confufion in future, I have found it 
necelTary to give each of thefe Trefoils a new character, as their 
prefent fpecific differences are not fufhcient to diftinguifh them 
from all others, ftill lefs from one another. I fhall now retain the 
fame order as above, fmce I think that to be the mofl natural. 

I. Trifolium alpefre, fpicis denfis, corollis fubasqua* 
libus, flipulis fetaceis divergentibus, foliolis lanceo- 
latis, caulibus flri^lis fimphciffimis, 

Trifoliun^. 



three Species (f Trifolium, 2^^ 

Trifolium alpeflre. Lmn, Spec, Plant, td. 2, p. 1082. *' 
Syfi, Nat, ed. 12, ion, ii. p, 502. - Af^/?/. Plant, n, 
p, 451. Afi^rr. Syjl. Feg, ed, 13, /. 573,* et ed, 14, 
/. 688. * ReJch. Syjl, Plant. P. iii. /. 555. v Jacqu, 
Obf, iii. /. 14, * tab. 64. ^/ F/. Aujlr, vol, v. /. 15,>f. * 
tab. 433. million. Pedctn, torn. i. ^. 304, «. IIOI. 
Trifolium majus purpureo flore ii. Cluf. Pann. p, 760. *' 
Trifolinm majus ii. Cluf. Hijl. libr. vi. p, 245. * 
Trifolium majus Clufii fecundum, non album, fed ni- 

brum. Bauh. Hiji. torn. ii. p. 375. ^^ 
Trifolium montanum purpureum majus, C. B. Ray, Hifl, 
torn, i. p, 944, n. 6, * Tournef, In/lit. p. 404. Boerh. Lugd, 
ed. 2, P, ii. p, 30, «. I. 
Trifolium fol. long. 11. purp. Rivin, Tetr, tab, i2yjig,jin» 

Dubra, 
Trifolium alpeflre. Doerr, Najf, p. i^/o^ «. 7. * 
Trifolium montanum purpureum majus. Bauh. Pin, 
p, 328. 

Habitat in locis ficcis montanis fjlvatjcis HungarliE, Auftrlce, 
Bohemice, Moravian, Stirise, Clufius, Jacquin^ Pedemontii, AlUoni^ 
et forfan Naffovise, Doerrien, 

Radix oblique defcendens, infra tellurem repens, fufca. 

Caules ftricti, fimpliciffimi, teretes, pallide virides. 

Stipula longae, fetaceae, uni-nerves, villofae, cauli approximatas, a fe 
invicem divergentes, vaginantes : vaginis anguftatis, femiam- 
plexicaulibus, margine utrinque redlis, initio villofis ciliatifque, 
dein glabris et vix nifi in fmubus inter flipulas petiol unique 
ciliatis. 

PetioU fubaequales, breviffimi, longitudine ftipularum, ere6li. 

H h 2 Foliola 



236 Mr. Afzelius'j Hiflory of 

FoUohi fubxqualia, ejnfclem fignrsc, lineari-lanceolat'a, acutiufcula 
et fafciculo pllorum terminata ; fopra evidentius fubtus obfo- 
letius venofa, verfus oras e crebiioribns majoribufque venis 
concurrentibiis quafi ftrlata; margine acj tadluQi fcabra, oculis 
nudis fublntcgcrrima, fed aimatis lubtiliter denticulata, et 
paucis brevibufque pilis inftrufta. 

Spica ovalis, vel folitaria et fefiilis intra folium florale dependens, 
vel plerumque gemina, et turn altera In proprio folio breviter 
peduncnlata feriufque florens prsecociorem deprimit. 

Flores erecli, denfe imbricati. 

Penanthlum villofiflimnm, ochroleucnm ; ftrils parum obfcuriori- 
bus. Denies pallide virides, fuperiores bini aequales et tubo peri- 
anthii breviores, inferlores bini etiam aequales fed fuperioribns 
paulo longiores et tubum perianthii nt plurimum a^quantes, 
infimus longitudine tubi corollae fed proximis dentibus duplo 
longior et interdnm ultra. 

Corolla inodora, tota faturate purpurea : alis vexillo vix breviori- 
bus, carina vero parum longioribus. 

Congruit qua ftaturam et habitum praefertim Trifolils rubentj^. 
fnoniano et pannonico, qu^ vero ab illo fatis differunt; 
nempe-^ 

Rubens vaginis inflatis flipulifque fubferratis multo majoribus ; 
foliolis fpinulofis e venis excurrentibus in hamulos ad apicem 
folioli verfos, alternos minores; fpicis longis pedunculatis ; pe- 
rianth io glabro, dentibus quatuor fuperioribus bafi dilatatis 
breviffimis, inferioribus binis pauUulo longioribus, infimo fili- 
formi, longitudine totius corolla, et proximis dentibus faltem 
triplo longiori. 

Montanum caulibus angulato-ftriatis, multifloris ; foliolis iifdem ac 
in Trifolio rubenti ; fpicis pedunculatis ; perianthio glabriuf- 

culoj 



three Species of ^rtfol'iunu 237 

ciilo, dentibus quatuor fupeiioribus aequalibus, infitno parum 
longiori ; corollis tetrapetalis albis, vexillo fubulato. 
Pannonicum caulibus fubangulatis, fscpe ramofis; ftipulis fubulatis 
ciliatis ; foliolis utrinque villofis, obfolete venofis ; fpicis majo- 
ribus peduncnlatis ; dentibus perianthii quatiior fuperioribus 
fub^qualibus vel inferioribus binis parum longioribus ; corollis- 
albidis. His, praeter alia, etiam differt Trifolium ochroleucum pan- 
nonico fimilJimum. 

2» Tr I FOLIUM medium, fpicis laxis, corollis fubae* 
qualibus, flipulis fubulatis conniventibus, caulibus 
flexuofis ramofis. 
Trifolium medium. Linn, Fn, Suec. ed, 2, p. 558. Hudf, 

AngL ed. i, p. 284, Jenk, Brit. PL p. 178. 

Trifolium flexuofum. Jacqu. Aujlr. iv. p. 45, * tab, 386. 

Allion. Pedem, i, p. 305, «. 1 105.. JVither, Bot. Arr. ed, 

Stok. p. 795, fq. * 

Trifolium alpeftre. Crantz, Auftr, Fafc, v. p. 407, n. 5. * 

Scop. Cam. ed. 2, torn. ii. p. 79, n. 924. * Lcerf. Herbonu 

p> 160, n. 575. * Lightf. Scot, p. 406. * Ro^J' Brit. FL 

V,.|i .#e^i: ^ j^^^ ^^ ^ p^if^ palat. torn. li. p. 335, «. 702. * MulL 

FL Dan. Fafc. xii. /. 3, tab. 662. Hudf. AngL ed. iy. 

p. 326. Ret%. Prodr. p. 141, n. 819. LiebL Fuld. p. 303, 

fq. * Relh Cant. p. 281, «. 539. * 
Trifolium pratenfe /3. Gort. Belg.ed. i,p. 212, et ed. 2,p. 195. 
Trifolium, n. 6. * Doerr. NaJ. p. 10^6. 
Trifolium fpicis villofis, foliis infidentibus, vaginarum 

caudis latioribus. HalL Stirp. p. 585, «. 12. ^''' Boehm. 

Lipf. p, 135, «. 318. -•»^- J^onn, Erford, p. 155, »• 5. * 

Qattenh. Heidelb, p, I'jj* 

Trifoliumi 



2q8 Mr. AfzeliusV Hljlory of 



Trifolium coroUis monopetalis aequalibus, fpicis fuhro- 

tundis, ftipuli^ lanceolatis, foliis integerrimis. Scop, 

Cam. ed.iyp. s'2'5^ ^- 3- ^ 
Trifolium foliis ovatis nervofis, fupremis conjugatis, va- 

ginis lanceolatis. Ha/I. Hifl. iotn. i. p, 163, n. 376. * 
Trifolium pratenfe purpureum majus. Ray. Hift. i. /. 944, 

n, 3. * Et ejufdem Syn. ed, I, p, 134, n- ^. ^ 
Trifolium purpureum majus, foliis longioribus et angufti- 

oribus, floribus faturatioribus. Ray. Syn. ed, 2, p. 194, 

n.6, * et ed. 3, p. 328, ?2. 7. * Tpurnef. Inji. p. 404* 

Boerh. Lugd. ed. 2, P. 1^ p. 3 1, n. 8. JVilf. Syn. p. 210, 

«. 7. * Hill. Brit. p. a^Si. "^ 
Trifolium flore rubro majus, folio maculofo. Lind. Wikjb, 

p. 38. (ed. 17 16.) 
Trifolium montanum purpureum majus, G. B. Rupp, Jen* 

ed, I, p. 247 ; et ed. 2, /. 207. * 

Dubia, 
Trifolium alpeftre. Gmd. 'tubing, p.^^, ScholLBarb.p.i^y 
. ^ , «. 595. *^' Matiufch, Fl. SiL p. 165, «.542. * Et ejufdem 
Enum. /. 186, n. 690. * Reich. Moeno-Franc. F. 2, p. 46, 
n. 521. Willden, Berol. p. i£ip.y n. 749. 
Trifolium fpicis villofis fubovatis, caule ere6lo, foliis 
ovato-oblongis integerrimis. Roy, Lugd. p, 380. 
n. 21. 
Trifolii pratenfis altera fpecies major. Gefn, Hort. p. 285. 

Habitat in locis ficcioribus elatis, prasfertim fruticofis, fylveftribus 
cretaceis et argillofis, in Anglia, Scotia, Suecia, Dania, Auftria, 
Carniolia, Pedemontio, Hollandia, Helvetia, et variis Germaniae 
partibus. 

7 Radix 



three Species of T'rJfoiium, 2-50 

Radix oblique defcendens, infra tellurem repens, fufcocincraf- 
cens. 

Cauks fuffruticulofi, inferne obliqui fabtrigoni (ficcati cxa6le tri- 
goni), fiiperne ere(5liufculi teretes, geniculato-flexuofi, ramofi: 
ramis e tumore axillari callofo adfurgentibus, faturatc viiides, 
interdum hie iilic rubentes. 

Siipulee longse, fubulatae, 3 — 5 nerves, glabrae, ciliatae, a caule di- 
vergentes, inter fe conniventes, vaginantes : vaginis angnftatis, 
fubamplexicaulibus, margine utrinque re6tis, initio viilofis, 
dcin glabris ciliatis.. 

Pet'wli inaEqnales, inferiore& ftipulis multo longiores, fuperiores 
fere brevioi'es, omnes lubdivei-gentes. 

i^«?/f(5A/ insequalia, initio et inferne ovata, dein et medio oblonga, 
tandem et fuperne fere lanceolata et fcepe fiibattenuata, folio- 
rum infimorum multo minora obtufiffima et interdum retufa,.. 
reliquorum majdra et acutiora, omnia fupra obfoletius fubtus 
evidentius venofa, fupra etiam lunulis binis pallidis longitudi- 
nalibus et ad apices contiguis frequenter notata, verfus eras e 
venis concurrentibus fubftriata, margh^e villls pluribus longi- 
uiculis appreffis inftruAa, ad ta<B;uro vix fcafara, oculis nudis 
integerrima, fed armatis tenuiflime denticulata, prsefertim in 
foliis fuperioribus. 

Spica initio fpheroides, tandem globofa vel ovalis, folitaria vel 
gemina ; altera plerumque ferius florente, feflilis vel pedun* 
culata, una vel utraque ; pedunculis insqualibus, unico vel 
duobus foliis fioralibus fuffulta ut plurimum dependentibus. 

Flores divergentes, laxe imbricati. 

Perianthiufyi comprefTiufculum, glabrum vel rarius pilofum, palli- 
dum et fsBpe hie illic purpurafcens, pra^fertim in fpicse vertice: 
firiis faturate viridibus et interdum purpureis. Denies virides et 

plerumque 



240 Mr. AfzeliusV Hijiory of 

plerumque fimul qua partem rubentes, fuperiores bini aequales 
et tubo perianthii breviores, inferiores bini etiam aequales fed 
itiperioribus longiores et tubum perianthii vcl sequ antes vel 
paullum excedentes, infmus longitudine tubi corollae, fed prox- 
imis dentibus multo, non tamen duplo, longior. 

Corolla odorata : vexillo alis vix longiore fubmucronato, ftriis fa- 
turatius purpureis inftru6to ; alis paliidioribus carina parum 
longioribus. 

D'lffert a Trifolio alpeftri abundanter, ut e defcriptione ntriufque 
comparata facile patet. Sed praeterea ab eo etiam diftinguitur 
partibus plurimis majoribns et colore obfcuriori prasditis ; 
radice magis lignofa et terras tenacius inhaerente ; caidlbus dif- 
fufiset vix umquam folitariis;y?///^//j latioribus, ut et vaginis, 
quae venis infuper crebrioribus gaudent faepiufque purpureis ; 
pet'wHs fubpilofis et non villofis ; folio fiorali faspius unico ; 
folioUs multo latioribas et plerifque oblongis, fubtus glau- 
cefcentibus nervoque minori in{lru6lis, verfus oras obfo- 
letius ftriatis : fplca donee integra floreat, vertice depreffa, et 
plantae cultae minori ; perianth'io ftriis magis elevatis remotifque, 
dentibus minus j^ilofis et infimo proportione breviori, utpote 
longitudinem dentium proximorum duplam non attingente; 
corolla dilutius purpurea, prsEfertim in alis, et ceteroqui 
qua magnitudinem formamque fmiillima illis in Trifolio 
rubentL 

3. Trifolium pratenfe^ fpicis denfis, coroUis insequa- 
libus, dentibus calycinis quatuor aequalibus, ftipulis 
ariftatis, caulibus adfcendentibys. 

Trifolium pratenfe. Urn. Spec, Plant, ed. I, p. 768, * et 
ed. 2, p. 1082.* Flor, Suee, ed. 2, p. 259, n. 666.* 



three Specks of TrifoUum* 141 

Syjl. Nat, ed. 10, torn. ii. p. 1177, et ed. 12, torn. ii. 
p. 502. Mant, Plant, ii* p. 451. Murr, Syjl. Feg. ed. 13, 
p. 572, et ed. 14, p. 688. Reich. Syjl, Plant, P .iii. 
p. 552.* Knlph, Cent, i. n. 91. Mill, Di3f, ed. 8, n. i. 
Hudf. Angl, ed. I, p. 284, et ed. 2, p. 325. Neck, Gallo- 
Belg, tom. ii. p. 315. Gmel, Sib. torn. iv. p. 22, n. 29."^'" 
Crantz* Aujir, v. p. 407, n. 6. * Scop. Cam, ed. 2, tom. ii. 
p. 79, n. 923. * Reg7J. Botan, Leers, Herborn, p. 160, 
n. 574. * Lightf. Scot, p. 404. * Poll. Pal at, tom. ii. 
p. 333, n. 701.* Mattiifch. Fl. Sil. p. 159, n. 541.* 
Doerr, Najf. p. 235, n. 5. * Zorn, Icon. cent. i. p. 56*, 
tab. 93. Gattcnh. Hcidelb. p. 177. * Liebl. Fuld, p. 302. * 
Cappel. Helmji, p. 126, fq. * Relh. Cant. p. 280, n. 538. * 

Wither, Bot, Arr, ed. Stok, p. 794, fq. * ¦ . 

Egenolph, Iniag, p. 139 (ed. ut vid. tert. fme impr. anno) 
et ejufd. Effig. p. 144 (ed. 1562). Lofiic, Hijl. tom. i. 
p. 104^ (ed, Lat. 155 1) et ejufdem Herb. P. ii. p. 180, 
fig. fm. (ed. Germ. 1564), p. 249, fig. fm. (ed. Germ. 
Uffenbach. 1630, alt. 1679, et Ehrhart. 1737). ^rag, 
"Hiji. p. 586. Dodon. Imag. P. ii. p. 39 (ed. 1554 et 1559) 
et ejufd. Hi/l. p. 338 (ed. Gall. 1557}, p. 423 (ed. Belg. 
1563)5 p^ 494 (ed. Angl. I578). Matth, Comm, p. 394 (ed. 
Lat. 1554), p. 439 (ed. Lat. 1559), p. ^y^ (ed. Lat. 
1565), p. 883 (ed. Ital. 1568 et 1604), p. 609 (ed. Lat. 
C. Bauh, 1598, et alt. 1674), p. 321 (ed. Gall. 1620, 
p. Pinet.), p. 330 (ed. Gall. alt. 1680), p. 491 (ed. Ital. 
1621 et 171 2). Camer^ Epit, p. 582. Tabern^m. Herb, 
P. ii. p. (ed. 1588), p. 235 (ed. C. Bauh. 1613)5 

p. 225 (ed. ejus alt. 1625), p. 908 (ed. Hier. Bauh. 
1664, et alt. 1731)? ^t ejufd. Icon. p. 523, Ger, Herb,^ 
I i , V* 1017,, 



242 Mr. AfzeliusV Hifiory of 

p. 1017, n. I.* Bech, Parn, P. ii. PhythoL p. 384, 

Lagun. Diofcor. p. 341. Zving. ^heair, p. 748. 
Trifolium pratenfe i. Matih, Comm. p. 472 (ed. Gall. 

1572, p. Moulin). Durant, Herb. L Hort, Sank. p» 10 14 

(ed. Germ. Uffenb. 16 19). 
Trifolium pratenfe i. Matthioli, Dalech* Hi/I. P. 3, 

p. 1354 (ed. Lat. 1587), p. 241 (ed* Gall. 1615). 
Trifolium fpicis villofis, caule diftuio, foliolis integcrrimis. 

Linn. Hort, Cliff, p. 375^ n. 16.* Virid. Cliff, p. 76.. 

FA Suee. ed. i, p. 2^22, n. 615. Koy. Lugd. p. 380, 

n. 20. Dalib. Pari/, p. 222. 
Trifolium fpicis villofis, foliis infidentibus, vaginarum 

caudis capillaribus. Hall, Stirp. p. 585, n. 14. * 
Trifolium coroUis monopetalis inaequcJibus, fpicis fubro- 

tundis, flipulis fetaceis, foliis integerrimis. Scop, Cartim 

ed. I, p. 524, n. I. * 
Trifolium caule obliquo, foliis ovatis hirfutis, fupremis 

conjugatis, vaginis ariftatis. Hall. Hiji. torn. L p, i63> 

. ..,,, .;...v:. -. -n- 377-* . 

-¦ , Trifolium vulgare. Blcicl*W. Herb. tab. 20. 

Trifolium. Roejf. Herb. p. 297. Egenolph, Imag. p. 10 (ed, 
1536). Borfi, Botan, p. 288, D. (ed. Lat. 1540). Rlvin, 
Tetr. tab. 11, fig. fm. 

Trifolium pratenfe purpureum. Ftichf. Hiji. p. 817 (ed. 
Lat. 1542) et ejufd. Herb. tab. 468 (ed. Germ. 1543. 
"Turn. Herb. P. ii. p. 1571 (ed. 1562 et 1568). Rudb, 
Hort. UpJ, p. 40 (ed. 1666), p. 1 1 1 (ed. 1685). Ray. Hiji. 
i. p. 943, n. 1, * Magnol. Charadt. p. 293. * IVilf, Syn, 
p. 209, n. 4. * Knorr, Thefaur, P. ii. p. 121, fq. * 
tab. T. 3. 

7 Trifolium 



three Specks of ^/nfoliunu ^±^ 

Trifollum purpureum. Ryff, I, Rh, Diofcor. p. 258 (ed. 

I543)> P- 257 (ed. 1549). Egen. Imag, p. 126 (ed. 

1546). 
Trifolium pratenfe alterum. Matth, Comp. p, 522. 
Trifolium purpureum vulgare. Baiih. Hiji, ii. p. 374. 
Trifolium pratenfe flore purpureo. Frank. SpecuU 
Trifolium flore purpureo. 'TilL Aboens, 
Trifolium pratenfe purpureum minus, folio maculofo. 

Lind, Wikjh. p. 38 (ed. 17 16). 
Trifolium pratenfe, flore monopetalo. T'ournef, InJl'tL 

p. 404. Boerh, Lugd, ed. 2, P. ji. p. 31, n. 7. Zannicb, 

Ifor, p. 264, n. I, * tab. 185. Linn. FL Lapp, p. 221, 

n. 273. 
Trifolium pratenfe rubrum. Weinm. Phyt, Iconogr, vol. iv. 

N''. 980. <r. 
Triphylloides pratenfis, flore purpureo. Ponied, AnthoL 

p. 241. Segu. Veron. vol. i. p. 274. 
Epithymum. Dorjl. Botan. p. 114. 
Var, j3. fativa. Halh Sttrp, p. 586, et Hlfi. i. p. 163. 

Trifolium pratenfe. Vahl, FL Dan, Faic, xv'il p. 6, 

tab. 989. 
Trifolium pratenfe y, Hudf, Ang!, ed. i, p. 284, et ed. 2, 

p. 325. Wither, Bot. Arr. ed. Stole, p. 795. * 
Le Trefle. Spe^, de la Nat. torn. iii. Ico?i, A. ad p. 26 

(ed. 1735). 
Trifolium purpureum majus fativum, pratenfi fimile. 

Ray. Syn. ii. p. 194, n. 5,* et ed. 3, p. 328, n. 6.* 

WiJf, Syn. p. 21O, n. 6. * HilL Brk. p. 381. * 
Var. -3/. flore albo. Hall. Hjfl. i.p. 164, cfr. Mattufch. Enum. 
p. 186, n. 689. Wither. Bot. Arr. ed. Stok. p. 795. 

I i 2 Dubia^ 



2j\j^ Mr. Afzelius'j Hlftory of 

Duh'ia, 
Trifolium pratenfe purpnrenm. Bauh. Pin. p. 327. * 
Trifolium. Ort. Sanit, cap. 476 (ed. 1426 et 15 17). 
Brunella. Brunf. Herb. torn. iii. p. 26. 

Habitat in pratis et pafcuis per totam Europam copiose ; etiam in 
Siberia, Gmeiin, et America Septentrionali, Herb. Banks, Locis 
pinguioribus, humidiafculis et apricis praefertim Ixtatur; nee 
tamen fterilia, ficciora atque umbrofa refpuit. 

Radix fere perpendicular! ter defcendens, infra tellurem vix repens, 
granulata, cinerea. 

Caules adfcendentes, infern^ altero latere planiufculi (ficcati tri- 
goni), ceterum teretes, fuperne ftriati, faspius fubramoli ; ra- 
mulis patentibus, tumore axillari deftitutis; virides, rarius rubi- 
cundo-tin<Sti, 

Siipuli^e breves, latse, venofas, glabra, conniventes, ariftatse: arifta 
capillari viridi apice praefertim pilofa, vaginantes : vaginis di- 
latatis, amplexicaulibus, margine utrinque arcuatis, glabris, 
rarius fubpilofis. 

PetioU inaequales, plerumque longiflimi et llipulis multoties lon- 
giores, patentes. 

Foliola inacqualia, ovata vel ovalia, obtufa, foliorum infimorum 
multo minora, fere orbiculata, retufa, omnia fupra depreffo- 
fubtus elevato-venofa, fupra etiam macula centrali fubfagittata 
pallida plerumque notata, fubciliata, integerrima vel interdum 
Icviter et acute crenulata. 

Spica ovata, obtufa, folitaria vel rariflime gemina, interdum 
pedunculata, plerumque vero feflilis intra folia duo floraJia 
oppofita ere6la. 

Flores erecli, dense imbricati, 

Perianthium fericeum, pallidum et interdum qua partem purpu- 

reum : ftriis faturate viridibus vel rubris, rarius fufcis. Denies 

S virides 



three Specks of TrifoHum, 245 

virides et faepe magis minufque rubentes, fuperkres quatuor 
2Equales, longitudine tnbi perianthii, injimus paullo longior, 
fed tubo coroUse brevior, fruclu mature ilU patentiflimi, hie 
ere6lus. 

Corolla odorata: vexillo alls longiore truncato et fsepe emarginato, 
flriis faturatius purpureis inll:ru6lo ; alls pallidioribus, carina 
longioribus. 

Differt a Trifolio medio vehementer, ut comparata utriufque de- 
fcriptio facile evincit, fed infuper huic etiam eft dillimile radice 
multominori; canUbus non flexuofis, plantae fpontanex humi- 
lioribus, magis procumbentibus,f^pe folitariis, baud raro fimpli- 
cifTimis, ramulifque fi adfunt paucioribus ; Jtiptdis parvis ct 
aliter formatis; vaginis xavXto majoribus, non ciliatis, et fiepius 
rubro- vel fufco- venofis ; foUh floralibns fempcr binis ; 

. foUolh brevioribus, plerifque ovatis, obtufioribus, fcepius 
albido-maculatis, obfoletius venofis ; fnpra venis plantoz 
vivse depreffis, ficcatas vero pauUulum elevatis ; fplca minori, 
multo rarius pedunculata geminaque, et vertice non depreffa ; 
/>fr/^;z/^/o nunquam prorfus glabro; corolla mvaoxi^ multo magis 
inxquali, plerumque pallidius purpurea, faltem aiirapice non, 
ut in Trifolio medio, coloratioribus ; i;m//o anguftiori ; ct 
tandem quod prius floreat. r/, 

Var, /3. planta agrefti multo major magifque glabra, caulibus pluri- 
bus; foliolisacutioribus; fpica fsepius pedunculata non adeo raro 
gemina ; perianthio plerumque villofiori, dente infimo propor- 
tione longiori ; vexillo alifque coroUse magis divergentibus; ftylo 
frequenter breviori; Icgumine faspe difpermo. In hoc ftatu culto, 
quum caules fmt difFufi et ad flexionem quafi tendant, e lon- 
ginquo I'rifolium medium adeo refert, ut pro eo facillime accipi 

que at ; 



5246 Mr. AfzeliusV Hijlory of 

queat ; Ted propiori infpr£lioiie, flripulis prsefertim dentibufque 

calycinis longe diverfis, fine ulla difficultate poteft dignofci. 
Far, y. non nifi corollis albis differt, in fads interdum occurrit, 

inter plantas agreftes multo rarior eft ; ex Anglise comitatu 

Derbienfi allatam vidi in Herb. Banks. 
Praeter has varietates, T^rifoUum praUnfe foliolis etiam quaternis, 

licet rarifTime, reperiri, inter omnes conftat. 

* * * * % * 

IN examining 'Trifollum alpejire^ medium^ and pratenfe^ I have found 
them agree in very many refpe<^s. To prevent tautology, I have 
taken care to avoid mentioning in their defcriptions any circum- 
ftance common to all thefe three fpecies ; but, for the fake of a 
more complete knowledge of the genus, I fliall here in one place 
enumerate them all. However, as I have not had an opportunity 
of feeing Trifol, alpefire living, I cannot with abfolute certainty 
determine the nature of its ftamina, piftilla, feed-veffels, and feeds ; 
but what I Ihall mention with refpe(5t to thefe parts of frudlifica- 
tion, I have chiefly taken from T'rifol. medium^ and particularly from 
the pratenfe. But as to the reft, I know they agree in the following 
circumftances. 

Radix perennis, teretiufcula, ramofa. 

Caules ex eadem radice plerumque plures, fplthamsei, pedales et 

ultra, foliofi, inferne glabri, fuperne villofi vel magis minufve 

pilofi. 
Folia alterna, vaginis infidentia, petiolata, ternata ; floralia fefTilia 

vel breviter peduncuiata, plerumque duo oppofita; altero 

femper minore. 
Vagin(£ membranacese, integerrima?, ochroleucae, nervofo-venofas 

{yajts 



thre^ Species of Trifollum, 247 

(•y^^/f/ hempe fimplicibus, verfus eras repetito-dichotomis, vi- 
ridibus vel purpureis, et in Trifalio fratenfi, interdum fnfcis), 
terminata:; Petiolo intermedio, et excurrentcs in Stlpulas laterales 
integerrimas et virides, in Tiifolio an tern praienfi faepe rubro- 
vei fufco- veiiofas. Vaginae ftipulseque florales ceteris multo 
am pi lores. 

PctJali fupra canaliculati, ceterum ftriatuli, "villori vel magis mi- 
nufve pilofi. 

FoUola fubfe(rilia> nervofo-venofa lit vaginae, fupra glabra fubtus 
ful^villofa, inprimis juniora, et pallidiora; floralia minora an- 
gufliora et plerumqne lanceolata. 

Sl'ica tcrminales : floribus feflilibus in rachi fubangulata aphylla 
villofa. 

Ptrianihium turbinato-cylindricum, monophyllum, tubulofum^ 
abbreviatum, inferum, perfiftens, decemflriatum; ftriiselevatis;. 
quinquedentatum ; dentibus finu rotundato remotis, feta- 
ceis, pilofis, re6lis, infimo interdum adfcendenti in Trifolio 
medio, et forfan etiam alpejlrl. 

Corolla monopetala, purpurea, marcefcens, papilionacea ; vex* 
illo reflexo alifque patentibus obtufis, carina coloratiore. 

Fllamenta decern, hyalina, apice virefcentia, unum totum Ji- 
berum capillare, novem in membranam germen invol- 
ventem inferne connata, fuperne libera, primum fubulata 
et dein apice incraflata. 

Anthers fubrotundas Incumbentes flavae. 

Germen ovatum vel oblongum glabrum virefcens. 

Stylus unicus, deorfum attenuatus, adfcendens, hyalinus. 

Stigma fimplex deflexum obtufum prafmum. 

Legumen ovale vel oblongum comprefliufculum glabrum mono- 

fpermum, 



fjfl Mr. Afzelius'j Hifiory of three Species ofTrtfoUum, 

fpermum, in perianthio, cujus faucem fquamulce claudunt, 
occultatum corollaqu^ emarcida cin<5lum, atque flylo per- 
fiftente mucronatum, in latere verfus apicem dehifcens, femine 
maturo cinerafcens vel flavicans. 
Semen fubreniforme, comprefliufculum, glabrum, nitidum, fub- 
flavefcens. 



XXVI. Jn 



( 249 ) 



XXVI. An Account offeveral Plants prefented to the Linnean Society-^ at 
different limes, by Mr, John Fairhairn dnd Mr, Thomas Hoy, Fellows 
of the Linnean Society, By the Prejiaent. 



c 



Read March I, 1791. 



I. G O S T U S fpeciofus. 



lOSTUS foliis fubtus fericeo-villofis. 
C. arabicus. Jacqu, Ic, Rar, vol, i. t, I. Collect , vol, 1% 

143; 

Bankfea fpeciofa. Konig, Monandr. 75. 

Tsjana-kua. Rheed. Mai. vol. xi. 15, /. 8 ? 

Herba fpiralis hiriuta. Rumph, Amb. vol, vi, 143, t, 64, 

/• I ? . 

Native of the Eaft Indies. 

Flowered in Sion Gardens in 1790. Mr, Hoy, u 

This fine plant has been very improperly confounded with the 
Coftus arabicus of Linnaeus. The latter is the fpecies defcribed in 
his Hortus Chffortianus, of which a drawing by Ehret is in the 
library of Sir Joieph Banks, but its fynonyms are even in that 
work much confufed. It is probable there may be many fpecies 
comprehended under thofe fynonyms, nor is our prcfent knowledge 

K k of 



2^o Dr. SmithV Account of Plants 

of the fubje6l fiifficient to extricate their differences. The above 
fpecific chara6ler is propofed for the prefent, for want of a better. 

It is doubtful whether the above fynonym of Hort. Mai. belongs 
to this fpecies, though much refembling it, except that in that 
figure the lower lip of the corolla is perfe<5lly entire, in ours it 
is trifid and undulated. 

Rumphius's Herha fpiralls'hlrfuta may be our plant ; but who 
can judge from his miferable diminifhed figures in fo nice a 
point ? 

Profeffor Jacqnin's magnificent figure, and full defcription, render 
all further obfervations unnecefTary ; except that he has omitted 
to mention the fpiral contortion of the flem, remarkable in this 
plant, and which has led us to the application of Rumphius's 
fynonym. 

2. S T A T I G E latifolia. 

Statice fcapo paniculato ramofifTimo fcabro, foliis pu- 

befcentibus, pilis fafciculato-ftellatis. 
Limonium folio Enulse, flabelUs tenulfTimis ramofifTimis, 
floribus parvis caernleis. O^rber. MSS. Herb.hinn. 

Firft gathered by Gerber in Ruffian Tartary, on 
the banks of the river Don, near Afoph. 

Flowered in Sion Gardens in 1788. Mr, Hoy, n 

Leaves all radical, oblong, a foot or more in length, entire, 
flightly undulated, fomctimes emarginated, pubefcent and 
foit to the touch, being fprinkled all over v\dth little ftellated 
fafciculi of foft fliort hairs. 

Sialks very much branched, and fpreading in every direction, 
covered with the fame kind of pubefcence as the leaves, 

but 



prefented by Mejfrs. Fatrbalrn and Hoy, 25 1 

but rather more harfh; branches roundifh, alternate, termi- 
nating in fimple horizontal racemi. BraSiea fmall, concave, 
acute, two together at each divifion of the panicle, one of 
which is placed on the outfide of the branch at its bafe, and 
the other in its axilla. 

Flowers moftiy two together, emerging from two fmall braSieo', 
like thofe on the ftalk ; but furniihed alfo with two larger 
and more obtufe bra£ieee^ with a large membranous margin. 

Calyx tubular, membranous, five-toothed, whitiili, with five 
green angles. 

Corolla longer than the calyx, blue. 

AnthercJC yellow. 

This fpecies ihould be placed after Statice Limonium. 

3. SEMPERVIVUM flellatum. 

Sempervivum caule herbaceo pubefcente, foliis fpatulatis 

fparfis. 
Sedum petrjEum rotundifoliura, flore luteo ftellato Montis 
Baldi. Seguier, Veron. vol. W. 3G0, /. 17. 

Found by John Baptift Scarella, on the rocks of 
Mount Baldus. Seguier, 

Abundant in Chelfea Garden, where it flowers^ 
every year. Mr, Falrbairn, o. 

This whole plant is, as it were, a reprefentation in miniature of 
Sempervivum arboreum, but more lax and difFufe. It is abundantly 
diftinguifhed from that fpecies by its annual root, herbaceous pu- 
belceht ftem, and fpreading panicle. The flowers are yellow, and 
agree perfe6fly with the generic chara6ter of Sempervivum, not 
with that of Sedum. 

K k 2. 1£ 



1^2 Dr. S mi thV Account of Plants 

If the fynonym of Seguier above quoted be right, we learn from 
thence the native country of this plant, which has long been cul- 
tivated at Chelfea ; but from whence it was brought is not 
known. 

This Sempervivum is extremely different from the Sedum alfi- 
naefoUum of Allioni ; but may perliaps be the Sempervivum alp'mum 
Montis Baldl, Joins lenticulatlsy jiorlbus non puntlatls^ of Mauritius 
Hoffman, mentioned by that author in his Specimen Pedemontanum^ 
p. 1 6. 

4. ASTRAGALUS leucophseus. 
Astragalus caulefcens procumbens, leguminibus fub- 
cylindricis redtis glabris, foliolis obcordatis fubtus 
villofis. 

Communicated by Mr. Fairbairn from Chelfea 
Garden, i;88. n 

The native country of this Aftragalus is unknown. It appears 
to be an old inhabitant of Chelfea Garden, and was marked with 
the name of Aftragalus pilofns in Miller's Herbarium. It has, 
however, no affinity to the A. pilofus of Linnaeus, nor does it even 
agree with the defcription of that plant in Miller's Didtionary. 

Our plant is allied to A. hamofus ; but differs from that fpecles 
in having rounder leaves, more flowers in a fpike, and efpecially 
in having ftraight, not recurved, pods, only half the length of thofe 
of A. hamofus. 

5. MIMOSA myrtifolia. 

Mimosa foliis ovato-lanceolatis obliquis undulatis acu- 
minatis margine cartilagineis : primordialibus pinnatis. 

Raifed 



prefentcd by Mcffrs. Fciirbmr7i and Hoy, 2,53 



Railed from feeds brought from New South 
Wales, in Sion Gardens, where it flowered in 1790. 
Mr, Hoy, t? 

The Branches are fomewhat angular. 

Leaves alternate, oblique, of a glaucous green, very much undu- 
lated, and near two inches in length, with a ftrong central 
rib. 

Flowers on the young branches very numerous, fragrant like 
thofe of Spiraea Ulmaria, and growing three or four together, 
in little heads. 

Calyx fmall, green, obfolctely ciliated. 

Corolla greeniili white, fometimes reddiili, of four petals. 

Stamina numerous. 

6. MIMOSA fuaveolens. 
Mimosa foliis linearibus acuminatis re6lis mafgine carti- 
lagineis : primordialibus pinnatis, ramis triquetris. 

Flowered 1790, in Sion Gardens, from feeds brought 
, s from New South Wales. Mr. Hoy. ^? 

The Branches are mofl: acutely triangular, and much comprefled ; 

their edges bright red. 
Leaves alternate, four or five inches long, with a rib and margin 

like the laft. 
Flowers in axillary racemi, yellowifh white, fragrant, of four 

petals. 
Stamina numerous. 

Young Capfules fmooth and glaucous. 

This fpecies, as well as the preceding one, belongs to tliat 

fmgular tribe of Mimofas, for the knowledge of which we are 

6 indebted 



254 ^^* SmithV Account of Plants^ ^c, 

indebted to the fouthern hemifphere, all which have totally 
different leaves in their adult ftate from what they produce at 
firft fpringing out of the ground. The feedling plants bear 
conjugated pinnated leaves, like mod of this genus ; but the 
common footflalks of the fucceeding leaves being gradually 
dilated, at length lofe their foliola, and afTume the appearance 
of fimplc entire leaves ; nor does the tree afterwards produce 
any other. We have no defcription of the feedling leaves of 
Mimofa fimplicifolia (hinn. SuppLX but it is probable they alfo are 
at firft of the pinnated kind% 



¦'"tg fwui »miim^-i i!i-:^,M!!i^viixisg:0miii^^^xr.- 



XXVII. 



( 255 ) ¦ . 



XXVII. ExTKACTs/rom the Minute Book of the Limean Society. 



November 4, TV /T^^- DRYANDER communicated to the 
1788. XV JL Society, from Sir Jofeph Banks, Bart, a 

fpecimen of an incomplete Bupreflis ; fent to Sir Jofeph 
from the Committee of Warehoufes of the Eaft India 
Company, on account of the damage it had done to a bale 
of muflins. It was found in its prefent ftate on opening 
a bale of piece goods received from Bengal, and appeared 
to have eaten through fifteen pieces of muflin, of eight or 
ten folds in each piece, making itfeif a palTage of about its 
own fize. _„ 

This Bupreftis, in fize, fhape, imprefTed lunula; of the 
thorax, fhield, and canaliculated abdomen, exa6lly refembles 
the Bupreftis canaliculata Fabr. Mant. p. 181, n. 58, but 
differs in colour. The B. canaliculata wants the two golden 
fpots on the thorax, which this has, like thofe of B. vittata. 
The abdomen of B. canaliculata is bright purple on the upper 
fide ; in this it is of a fhining green, appearing in certain 
lights of a dark blue. The under fide of the fame part 
is in B. canaliculata of a dull copper colour, in this of a bright 
green. 

The B. canaliculata is faid to come from Africa ^qtiinodiiaHs 

(Sierra 



256 Exrn ACTS Jrom the Minute Book 

(Sierra Leona) ; but that refts entirely on the authority of the 
label in Sir Jofeph Banks*s collection, which may poflibly 
be erroneous. 

Of forty fpecies of Bupreflis in the cabinet of Sir Jofeph 
Banks, none but the B. canallculata has all the joints of the 
abdomen canaliculated ; nor is fuch a lliield to be found 
except in that fpecies and another, defcribed from the fame 
cabinet by Mr. Fabricius, during his laft flay in England, 
tinder the name of quadridentata, 

December 2, 1788. The Prefident laid before the Society a 
drawing of a fingular Pidgeon, accompanied with the fol- 
lowing letter from Mr. Latham. 

** Dear Sir, 

u With this you will receive an accurate drawing, by 
*' Mr. Lewin, of a Lufus Naturae in a dove-houfe Pidgeon, 
*'' now in my colle6lion. 

" AU 1 know of the hiftory of this extraordinary produc- 
*' tion is, that, a few years fince, a perfon employed to take 
*' all the young birds from their holes, for the ufe of the 
*' table, obferved this lingular fpecimen in one of the nefts, 
*' along with another fledged in the ufual manner, the pro- 
" dvice of one hatch. His curiofity being excited, he brought 
*' it into the houfe ; where it lived for a month or longer, 
*' and then died, 

" The peculiarity of this fubjecl confifts in its not having 
'' a fmgle complete feather on any part of its body, although 
** entitled from its age to have been fully fledged ; infl:ead of 
*' which, eveiy feather is ftill inclofed in a cafe the whole of 

"its 



of the Linnean Society. 257 

" its length, which in fome of the greater quills amounts to fix 
" inches. Indeed a kind of fringe appears at the ends of moft of 
" the feathers ; and, on diire6ling a feather, the fliaftis found 
*' by no means deflitute of web, but the latter is confined 
*^ merely by the furrounding fheath. It can fcarcely have 
" efcaped the notice of an obferver, that when a new feather 
" firft makes its appearance on the body of a bird, a tender 
" filmy fubflance environs and defends it, during its infant 
** ftate. But no fooner does the web increafe to any ftrength, 
*' than the film gives way, and the feather continues to grow 
** to its perfect maturity. 

<' That this difeafe did not occafion the bird's death, I am 
** certain ; as it appeared healthy and well during the time it 
" lived. 

'^ I fhall be happy if the above fhort hiftory and drawing 
** fhould prove worthy the notice of the Linnean Society. 

*' I am, &c. 
(Signed) "JOHN LATHAM." 

Dart FORD, 
November 4, 1788. 

March 2, 1790. The Prefident exhibited fome defcriptions in 
Italian, accompanied with rude drawings, of feveral rare 
plants found near Bologna in 1652, appearing to be an 
original manufcript of Zannoni, the property of Mr. Thomas 
F. Forfter, jun. of Threadneedle Street. 

FINIS. 



DIRECTIONS FOR placing the PLATES. 

Tab. I. PHALiENA B. Lubricipeda, &c.' to face page 75 

2. Flowers of Cypripedium ' 80 

3. Ditto • ' ' 80 

4. Lichens 84 

5. Curculio Lapathi et Silpha grifea ¦ ¦ ¦¦ 89 

6. Stylephorus chordatus ¦ 92 

7. Hirudo viridis > 95 

8. Canella alba • 102 

9. Cancer ftagnalis > — . no 

10. Fefluca fpadicca from Rudbeck 117 

Table of the Appearance and Difappearance of 

Birds ¦ *¦ 121 

11. Tringa Glareola • * ¦ ¦ — 130 

12. Fucus fnbfufcus ¦ ¦ ¦¦¦ ¦ 134 

13. Spring in the Wings of Moths — 144 

14. Leaves of various Species of Begonias ¦ 161 

15. Begonia hnmilis < 166 

16. — -^ tenera 169 

17. Echeneis lineata, p. 187 — Fafciola clavata, ditto — 

Hirudo branchiata, p. 188 — Phalasna tubercu- 

lana, p. 196 — and Phalaena Sparrmannella, p. 197 196 

18. Dillenia Integra • 199 

1 9. retufa '. 200 

20. dentata • ¦ 201 




