'C->j' 



S ?v\.V' A.V? 



MEMOIRS 



OF THE 



LITERARY 



AMD 



PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY 



OF 



0imtf^mtv. 



>•':.':«» 



!^ -Jj , .SECOND SERIES 



A K*^xyy^ M/u.<^i 



VOLUMK I. 



PRINTED FOR 

R. BICKERSTAFF, STRAND, LONDON. 

by 
S. RUSSELL, MANCHESTER. 



1805. 



vir M 



lilTIJ 



T/ 01HS[O8OJlH« 




t&if\ 



M 1 



^t';.0i 



^ooaz 



:iAT2iT:' 



ADVERTISEMENT. 

MORE than twenty years have elapsed since the 
publication of the first volume of the Society^ s Memoirs, 
Jn this period five successive volumes have appeared , 
the trvo last of which "jcere published in separate parts. 
The first and second Jmve been reprinted, and a few 
of the copies are still on sale , the third is out of print ; 
and some of the fourth and fifth remain in the pub- 
lisher's hands. — The progress of the experimental 
Sciences has been so considerable of late years, as to 
¦render ineligible the republication of Essays however 
valuable originally. The inability, also, of procuring 
a complete set of the Memoirs has deterred some 
personsfrom purchasing the former volumes. These 
considerations have induced the Society to covirnence 
a second series, and they have accordiiigly detw- 
minated this the first volume of the series ,• it being 
also the sixth published by t/ie Society since its Insti- 
tution in 1781. 

The Society wish it to be understood, as formerly, 
that they do iwt consider themselves answerable for the 
accuracy of the facts and reasoning in the several 
Essays : but that the responsibility rests entirely with 
the respective authors. 

Noveral)er 6, 1805. 



V ^'\ 



>•>/. liiVv 



L \ ^\• s. 

1. A HAT tlie Ortlinary Mtnibers only shall be ravestcd 
with the privik^gc of votiug and electing Members ; ami that 
the whole cxpeiif'^s of the Society shall dcvolvr upon them. 

II. That Gentlemen residing at a distance fmm Man- 
chester shall be eligible into tliis Society, under the 
title of Honorary Members; provided no one 1x5 recom- 
mended who has n<;t distinguished himself by his literary 
or philosophical publications. 

III. That Gentlemen at a distance, who have favoured 
the Society with important communications, or from whoni 
such contributions may be e^^pected, shall be eligible, under 
the title of Corresponding Members. 

IV. That every Candidate for admission into the Society, 
whether as au Ordinary', Honorary, or Con-espondin^ 
Member, shall be prc^x>sed by at least three Ordinary 
Members, who shall sign a certificate of his being, from 
their knowledge of him, of his character, or of his writings, 
a fit person to be ackiiitted into It ; which certificate shall 
be read at not fewer than two successive meetings of tHe 
Society, previous to the evening of election. 

V. That no election shall be niade, either of Ordinary, 
Honorary, or Corresponding members, except at the Quar- 
terly Meetings; and that notice shall be given to each 
Member, whenever a candidate is nominated. 

VI That every election shall be conducted b}- ballot, 
and that the majority of votes shall decide ; and that tJie 
President shall have the determining voice, if the iiamter 
of votes be equal. 



vi. h A W S, 

VII, That M-heii an Ordinary Member removes to a 
greater distance than twenty miles from Manchester, he 
may be entitled to the pontinuance of the privilefrcs of the 
Society, by paying five guineas to the Treasurer, in Heu of 
liis anjiual subscription, ^ ,^^ r^^^,^ , I J , 

Vill. That a Pi-esldcnt, four Vice-Presi'^i^Vs^' t\Vb'\^c'^ 
cretaries, a Treasurer, and a Librarian be elected annliatlV 
by -the majority of Members present, on the last Friday 
in the ii^onth of April, Thp ^leciti,on to be,dcter;nine(l bv 
ballot.- ¦ ' ^ -"¦ "^t ^!— •¦'• :-^ 

¦ • • /ifr!(.'fioII 'lo ohii 

IX{ 'That a CommiUcHi of Papers shall bd apjisiiitedrby 
ballot, at the same time, which shall conjjist of the Presi- 
dent, Vjce-Presidents, Secretaries, Treasurgr, ai^i^ LiJ^a- 
rian, . together with six other Membersof 't^le Society'^ and 
that this Committee shall decide by ballot concerning the 
publication^of any paper w^ii<ih shall. |iave oeen jead l^efbr^ 
the Society; and shall select, with the consent of the Au- 
thor, detached parts of any paper, the whole of which liiiiy 
not be deemdtl pioper.fon piiblication ; but that the pre- 
sence- of kcven Members of thfe Committee shall Ue neces- 
sary for-such discussion or decision; ' .' .'I*.'/ « , , ;, 

,, X. yh3!^ ^Visitors paay.be introduced by any Member ,(o 

the Meetings of the Society, with. the permission, of tlie 

'i ¦. • ¦ 'Y^'''^ ¦ " ' ••''¦' ^" ' " '' '. w/j» , \i hi ij.,'j: ^i'i' 
Chairman. , ... 

IJ oJ aooi /.xij tVJarc:' 

XL: That every Member \yUo shall favour the .Spcicty 

w'ith com^iunlcations, shall send them to one of the Secre-. 

tjiries, the Monday before the meeting of the Society .j' 

XII. That the Secretary to whom the papw ^hall bie 
delivered, shall, with the. , approbation of the Pre?id,Qi;t, 
or \\\Q Vice-Presidents, have the power of suspenclin^ the 
reading of it uutill it be referred to a Mcetinjj oi'the Com-^ 
mlttce of Papers, whose decision shi^U be final. 



L A W/.S,| Til, 

Xin. That all papery judged admissible shall be read by 
one of the Secretaries, or by the Author, in their order. .... 

XIV. That no more tlwii halt' au hour shall bo allowed 
£6r the reading of any paper ; and if the whole cannot be 
read within that time, the remainder (except the Society 
determine otherwise) shall be deferred till the succeeding 
evening. No paper however shall engage more than two 
evenings, without the conseut of the Society, expressed by 
ballot, if required. 

XV. That every Ordinary Meaiber \\l»o produces a 
paptiv, shall therewith deliver a summary of its leading 
contents, which shall be read, paragraph by paragraph^ aftor 
the paper to regulate its discussion. 

XVI. That the Speakers shall direct to the Chair any 
observations they may make ; and, if it be difficult to 
command immediate attention, it is desirable that they 
should stand up when they address the President. 

'"JCVn. That authors be rec^uested to furnish the Society 
w?th an epitome of'th'(^i^ piapers, i\hich may be read at th<; 
meeting succeeding the reading of each paper, and tlie 
discussion reneWfed. 

XVIII. That <:ach Ordinary Member shall pay one; 
guinea aumuilly, by half yearly payments, into the hands 
of the Treasurer, to defi-ay incidental expences, and to 
establish a fund for the benefit of the Society, tach Mem- 
ber on his election to pay his subscription for the current 
half year, together with two guineas as an admission fee. 

XIX. That .each of the Vice-Presidents, in rotation, 
undertake his oliice, for one tnonth; during which term 

e shall take the pljair, in theab^nce of the President, at 
seven o*clock precisely : it is hoped that he will furnish ar- 
ticles of intelligejice ; and when no j>:ipvr is before the 



THK L A W S. 

Society, it is expected ' thjft he ^ovide a subject fot^ {Hs- 
cussion. "* 

• XX. That no laws shall be enacted, rescinded, or altered, 
but at the quarterly meetings, on tlie last Fridays in the- 
months of January, April and October 5 and that notice shall 
be given, at least, fourteen days previous to those meetings.' 

XXI. That the Society shall. publish a, yolqme of mis- 
cellaneous papers, at least, every two year^. ^ And that, at 
stated times, the Committee shall select from the papers 
whicli have been read to the Society, such as shall appear 
to be most worthy of publication, but that napa^er shall 
be published without the consent of the author. Thfit 
every paper, voted for publication by the Committee of 
Papers, shall be sent to the press without delay j that 
notice of the printing shall be given to the author, and that 
he be entitled to thirty separate copies, on paying the ex- 
traordinary expences attending them. 

XXII. That a Library be formed for the use of the 
Members of this Society, and that tlT.(f. Librarian be author 
rized to purchase such books as shall be ordered at the 
quarterly meetings of the Society; but that no books shall 
be taken out of the library, without leave of the Librarian, 
and that the time of keeping it be limited to Seven days. 

XXIIL That the resolution to establish a library be an- 
nounced to the Honorary and Corresponding Members of 
the Society ; and that it be intimated to them by the Se- 
cretaries, that donations of their past and future publica- 
tions will be highlj/ acceptable. 

XXVI. 'ThHt* 'two SILVER MEDALS shall bc given «??- 
MiiUj/',6ne\.o the a:uthor6f the best Essay on a Literary, and 
another to the best on a Philosophical Sul3Ject, which shall 
have been read ?t the Society during the course of the 
Sda'soti ; to be determined by the committee of Paperr^. 



A LIST OF THE MEMBERS. 



President. 



The Rev. George Walker, 
F. R. S. 

Charles White, Esq 
Mr. Thoimi 
S. A. Bard 
Ed\\ard Ilol 

Jolm Hull, M. D. 7 ^ 

Mr. Jolm I>alton. j ^ 

Nathaniel Ileywooc], Esq. Treasurer. 

Mr. J. Hutchinson, Librarian. 



hite. Esq, F R. S. ) 
asHenrv, F. R. S.f ,r 
sley, M.*^D. f^ 

olme, M. D, ) 



ice-Presidents. 



Secretaries. 



Mr. James Ainsworth. 
Mr. Thomas Ainsworth. 
Mr. John Atkinson. 
Mr. William Atkinson. 
Mr. Thomas Barrett. 
Mr. Charles Barritt. 
Mr. Cha. Ciiristian Becher. 
Michael Bentley, Esq, 
Mr. H. H. Birley. 
Mr. John Bill. 
Mr. J. J. Boutflower. 
Mr. Jolm Close. 
Mr. John Clayton. 
Mr. Edward Clayton. 
Mr. William Cooke. 
Mr. John Douglas. 
Mr. David Dockray. 
Mr. George Duckworth. 

* Mr. Peter Ewart. 
Mr. Thomas Fosbrooke. 

* Mr. Benjamin Gibson. 
Mr. Samuel Gregg. 



Mr. Gavi# Hamilton. 
Lt. Col. Hanson. 
Mr. Edward Hanson. 
Mr. William Harrison. 
* Mr. William Hemy. 
Mr. Benj. A. Hey wood. 
Mr. Siunuel Hibbert, jun. 
Mfr; Thomas Holland. 
Mr. Thomas Houghton. 
Mr. Thomas Hoyle, jun. 
IV^r, Jiohn Jackson. 
Mr. John Jenkinson. 
Rev. William Johns. 
Mr. Samuel Kay. 
Mr. John Kennedy. 
Mr. William Lamb. 
Mr. George Lee. 
Mr. Charles Macnivcn. 
Mr. John Mather. 
Mr. William Mitchell. 
Mr. Richard Moulson. 
Mr. J. D. Moxoji. 



X LIST OF MExMBERS. 

Mr. John Nash. * P. Roget, M. D. 

Mr. Thomas Oilier. Mr. John Rothwell... 

Mr. Robert Peel. Mr. Thomas Ross. 

Mr^ Robert Peel, jun. Mr. Richard Rushforth. 

Lt. Col. George Phillips. * Mr, John Sharpe. 

Mr. Robert Phillips. Mr. John Walter Welchman,, 

Mr. Thomas Robinson. Mr. Thomas Yates. 

N. B. Those marked (*) are ofthe Committee of Papers^ 

CORRESPONDING MEMBERS, 

William Alexander, M. D. Halifax-. 

Dr. Astbury, Newcastlcrunder-Line. 

George Bevv, M. D. Kendal. 

Dewhurst Bilsborrow, M. B. Derby, 

D. Campbell, M. D. Kendal. 

Mr. John Dawson, Sedbergh. 

Mr. A. Deriabin, Russia. 

Mr. James Denholm, Glasgow. 

Mr. Thomas Falconer, A. M. C. C. C. Oxford 

Mr. Fontana, Surgeon, Member of the Asiatic Society, 

George Smith Gibbes, M. D. Bath. 

Dr. Gibelin, of Aix. 

Mr. John Gough, Kendal. 

James Greene, Esq. M. P. 

Mr. Edward Greene. 

Rev. JcAnsonGrant, A.'B. ^^' 

John Haworth, M. D, 

Capt. Henry, 14th Infenfry. 

Mr. Frederic Hoffman, Bierl in . 

Thomas Hull, M. D. Beve^rley, 

John Johnston, M. D. 

William Lambe, M. D. 

John Lyon, M. D. Liverpool, 

James Mease, M. D. Philadelphia. 

Dr. Peadle of Aix. 



LIST OF MEMBERS. j3a 

•Alexnndcr N. Scherer, Mv T>. of Weimarv 

Mr. Helen us Scott, liombay. 

Hichard T^Vuton, Esq. 

Charles Taylor, M. D. Secretary to the Society for ibe 

Encouragement of Arta, &c. 
Mr. James Thomson. 

Rev. Robert Uvedale, A. B. Trinity College, Cambridge^ 
Dr. Waterhouse, Cambridge, New England. 
Mr, Xiipma^ Willis, London. 
Mr. C. H. WilkinJ^on, London. 



lIOi^ORARY MEMBERS. 

John Aikin, M. D. 

James Anderson, L. L. D. F. RklS.i &.AL.'S. Editi. : 

Sir George Baker, Bart. F. R. S. Medic Reg. 

Sir Joseph Banks, P. R. S. &c. &c. 

M. Berthollet, Paris. 

Patrick Brydone> Esq. F. R. S. 

Sir Richard Clayton, Bart. 

l^dwood Chorley, IVL D. 

.L R.< Deimaii) M^ D. Amsterdam. 

Edward llussey Delaval, Esq. F. R. S. Reg^S.S*. Gotting. 

& Upsal. Sc Inst it. Bologn. Soc. ' 

Lt. Colonel Drinkwater, 
Rev. William Magee, B. D. Fellow of Triniiy College, 

Dublin. . 

Francis' Maseres, Esq. F^ R.'\S» •• 
William Falconer, M. D. F. R. S. 
Anthony Fothergill, M. D.-F.OR* S. 
M. Frossard» Paris*: . r •». I .1' M 
Rev. Thomas Gisborne, A. ISL 
Rev. George Gregory, D. D. Prebendary of Chiswick in the 

Cathedral of St. Paul, and Domestic Chaplain to the 

I/)rd Bishop of l^aodaff. 



xli LIST OF MKxMBERS. 

Charles Ilatchett/Esq. F. R. S. &c. 

William Hawes, M. D. ¦: 

John Hay garth, M. B. F. R. S. Londs,^'Edinv&c. 

Mf.WirrjtoH:ey,F.R. S-. 

Mr. George Hil)bert. 

Alexander Hunter, M. B. F. R. S. 

Jairt^^ J«f<nstone, M. i). 

Richard Kirwan, Esq. 1F, R, S. &g. 

Right Rev. Richard, Lord Bishop rtf Landaff, F. R. S. &c. 

Right Rev. Beilby, Lord Bishop ot* I^ondon. 

John Coakley Lettsom, M, D. F. R. S. and S. A. 

Mr. Patrick Mac Morland. 

Thomas Marsham, Esq. TreasureroftheLinnean Society. 

Henry Moyes, M. D. 

Sir George Onesiphorns Paul, Bart. 

George Pearson, M.BiF.R.S:t .CI ..I . 

M. Roland Platiere. - ' '^ .*•¦ ' 

M. Pointevin. 

Mr. William Rathbone. 

Rev. John Radcliffe, A. M. Braze n-nose-College, Oxford. 

Mr. William Roscoe. 

Benjamin Count Rumford. 

Benjamin Rush, M. D. Professor of the Theory and Prac- 
tice of Physic at Philadelphia, &c. 

Samuel Foait Simmons, M. D. F. R. S. 

James Edward Smith, M. D. F. R. S. &c. &c. 

Smithson Tennant> Esq. F. R. S. &c. &c. 

Rev. William Turner, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 

Sig. Alexander Volta, Professor of Experimental Philoso- 
phy at Como, &c. 

Rev John Whittaker, B. D. F. S. A. 

William Wright, M. B. F. R. S. Lon. and Eclin. 

Arthur Young, Esq. F. R. S. 



CON T E N T S, 



AnEssmj Fhjsiological ^ Experimental 
on the- Efects of Opium on the Living Sj/s- 
tern. By William Alexander, M. D p. i 

On the Machinery of the Ancient Epic 
Poem, By the Rev. G. Walker, F. R. S. ...98 

Observations on the Effect of Madder 
Root on the Bones of Animals, By Mr. 
B. Gibson 14g 

On the Use and Abuse of Popular 
Sports and Exercises, resembling those of 
the Greeks and Romans^, ai a national 
Object. By S. A. Bardsley, M. D. ....._;. |64 , 

Reverie ; considered as i:onnected xcith 
Literature, an Essa^.^,By the.^v..:. ^n 
Johnson Orant, A. B. .,,., ojj 



xlv CONTENT S. 

Experimental Enquiry into tlie Prd* 
portion of the several Gases or Elastic 
Fluids constituting the Atmosphere. By- 
John D^itbn.l,. J4..il..ll.,.ir..l,« 244 

On the Tendency of Elastic Fluids to 
Di fusion through 'ea2:h'^other: By John 
Dalton 259 

0?i\,(he M^Qrpt^iOH pf GaSes by Watdr 
and other Liquids. \ By John Dalton. 27 1 

A Description of a Property of Caout- 
choiiC'pf Jndiai^'RuUbie^y with some Re ) 
fkction$l on . the, _. CajtUe . qf . the Elasticity ¦'\ 
of this Substance. — In a Letter to Dr. 
Holme.- By Mr; Jc>hrVGough..::..v.:j:„ 288 

An- -Essay- on- - -tlhe llieory of- Mixed 
GaseSy and on the state of Water in the 
Atmospliere. By Mr: J. Gough. ........... 2^G 

On th€ Use of the Sutures in the Skulls - 
of Animals. By Mr. B. Gibson. ...... i... -J 317- 

On the Moral Influence of History. 
By the^Rev. G.Walker, F. R, S^.....,.... 328 



CONTENTS. XV 

Reflections on llislory and on Historians 
Ancient and Modern. By John Hol- 
land 359 

On Natural and Moral PhilosopJnj ; 
and the Proper Manner of Philosophising 
in both. By the Rev. G. Walker, 
F. R.S 378 

A Reply to Mr. Dalton's Objections to 
a late Theory of Mixed Gases. — Iji a 
Letter from the Author to Dr. Holme. 
By Mr. John Gough 405 

Re^narks on Mr. Gough's two Essays 
on the Doctrine of Mixed Gases ; and on 
Professor Schmidt*s Experiments on the 
Expansion of Dry and Moist Air b\) Heat, 
By John Dalton 425 



ERRATA. 

Page 145 line 5, insert not at the end. 

179 line 5 of note, for Aero read iVcro. 



AV vA -v 



MEMOIRS 

of the 

I ITEBARYy: PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY 

of 

AN ESSAY, , 

Physiological and Experimental, 
ON THE EFFECTS OF OPIUM OX THE LIVING SYSTEM. 

BY 

WILLIAM ALEXANDm, M.D. 

.Cpamnnicated by Samuel Argent Bardslcy, M. D. 
•¦(READ FEBRUARY 15, AND MARCH 1, 1799.) 

PART THE FIRST. 

IN this Paper, which I have the honour to 
submit to the consideration of the Society, I 
propose to enter into an examination of two 
questions, viz. 1st. Can the effects exertejjt 
upon the living sj/stem, bi/ the pperation of 
Opiuniy be accounted for, ivHI tout the agency 
of the nervous system ^ 2d. What is tf^ naturae 
of that operation^ whether sedativf or stimulant? 
Thi^ subject I do not ^sel^ct. either , because J[ 
have some new doctrines to establish, gr 
^^ecause the generally received opinions con- 
cerning the oper^ion of Opium, requife ad- 

A 



<2 On the Effects of Opium 

dltional support, but rather because 'in the 
discharge of a duty for a long season neglected^ 
I am obliged to have recourse to those means, 
,)vhich the present opportunity allows me. 

in this' disquisition, it may be considered, 
that I enter upon the investigation of a subject, 
which has already been rendered barren by the 
diligence of preceding enquirers, and that con- 
sequently nothing of novelty can be expected. 
It is not under this expectation that I take up 
the pen, for how much soever may have been 
effected, something yet remains to be done by 
the diligent and patient enquirer, and, though 
nothing could be gained beyond a confirmation- 
of established opinions, yet if this be. done 
through the meana of accurate and frequently 
repeated experiraentsj something is added to 
the stock of information, and it must be consi- 
dered at the least as possessing a relative value. 

These experiments are not however destitute 
of some novelty in the arrangement, and they 
will be found to exhibit, in a dear analytical 
succession, the effects produced by opium upon 
the different parts of the animal machine. But 
It is not clear by any means, that the phy- 
.siologists of this day are agreed upon many 
points J which wilFbe brought forwards in this 
essay ; and mdre is required to be done, befort 
Xh'- iu'.ject ean.be considered as exhausted. 



on the Living System. 3' 

^fhe humoral pathology, \vhich had for a 
long space of tirhe occupied the schools of 
medicine, had no sooner been called in question 
than a variety of opponents arose in every 
quarter against it; the new opinions being 
clothed in professional authority and Enforced 
by- the learning and genius of several private 
tethers, the tide of opinion flowed in a con- 
trary direction, and it became the fashion to. 
account for all, or most of the deviations fiom a? 
state of health in the animal body, from some 
primary aheration in the condition of the solids. 
In many points the advocates^ for the new doc- 
trines were notwithstanding at issue with each 
other, and the memorable contest betwixt 
Haller and Whytt, respecting the origin and 
nature of irritability, opened to the physiologist 
new sources of enquiry and laid new foun- 
dations for future improvement. The agency 
of the nervous system, which was still necessary 
for the explanation of most of the phoenomena 
upon the theory of diseased solids, began at 
length to be exploded by the advocates of 
another yet more reftned and simplified, which 
the creative genius of John Brown u^ered 
jnto the. schools of physic. 

This doctrine rejecting the explanation of 
diseases upon partial and confined theories, at- 
A 2 



4 On th^ Efects of Opium 

tempted td refer all the various changes in the 
human body, to one general law. He maiii- 
taiiled the existence of a principle in the ani- 
mated body, which he denominated Excitabi- 
lity ; That this principle was characteristic of 
life; that action was the consequence of the 
operation of certain powers upon this prin- 
ciple, health the consequence of the due and 
proper operation of these powers, and disease 
the effect of too abundant or deficient action of 
these powiers. 

In this state of things the very accurate and 
most philosophical Thesis of Dr. Goodwin, 
upon the cause of death from suspension and 
submersion, made its appearance, in which he 
{jiainly proved the existence of a primary 
change in th.e: condition of the blood; that this 
condition was Sufficient, and indeed necessary 
to occasion death. About this period also the 
experiments of the celebrated Italian phiJQso-' 
pher, Fontana, attracted considerable attention 
and beciame the subject of much discussion. 
He contended from numerous experiments, 
that opium was a power, which exerted a 
direct influence upon the blood, or that the 
blood was a necessary agent to communicate 
its operation to the living and irritable fibre, 
and without the circulation of which, the 
usual effects of opium could not take place. 



.4yti th^ Livi7if( Sysienu 5 

HiV experiments, which excluded the agency 
of the 4>^rves ahogether in producing the ge- 
neral effects, resuhing from the exhibition of 
opium, afforded considerable support to those 
wliQ maintained 3ome nev^^^flpctripesof irritabi- 
lity, (a) This property was considered not 
only as not b^Jng derived from the nervous 
$ystemi bv^t capable of being encreased, di- 

{(i) T! i.)logisl$ rejecting, the nosology :.rJ 

practice of Dr. Bio'wn as rncompatibre wifh hU funda- 
nietltaf priW^pfes- bat »^opt^ng these, ahd Ubtng ihte 
b6rrov»<ed-iei!«t".Af CrritabiHry rrtstcad of excitability^ alv 
fenrptcd tq^t^i:^«h^a new hypothesis, hy expfoining aH 
the changes, which the body underwent in a state of 
health and dUea<(e, upon an alteration in this principle. 
The expcrimelhfs'of Foniaha,'whi*<fh i^eW todehy (he ih- 
/Iiienceof tH^ n6rve^, c6incki'rnw with rHis new hypnfth'tdsls 
were eagerly Embraced by them. 

* The manner in vfhifch ibcse physiologists explained rbe 
consumption of irriiabilily upon the application of a sti- 
mulus, without the agency of ihe nerves was somewhat 
curious. They supposed the prtupple of trfitabUity'waf 
like the matrer of heat, diffusible 6\'cr every part of a 
body endowed with it, that when aoy portion of il wai 
destroyed by the action of a power applied (oany part, 
the expenditure, thus occasioned, was supplied by the 
influx of a new quantity from the general slock in the 
syskni; tiiu^ the continued action of a siiraulant poWer, 
ke< I ihg iip a'contJiHied e'icpenditdre;'\here would be « 
lucce^s^on'ofnevr influxes until the wl^ote irTitabiliry of the 
body wBs consumed by the repeated wants of that part 
4o wbiijhllife desUuciive ^dnt w»» appli^^d. 



6 On the Effects df Opuim 

minished, or exhausted by the apphcation of 
external powers, which had no effect upon the 
nervous system, and that it was, to use the 
words of Dr. John Brown, ' d« • appHed to his 
principle of Excitability, '^ Una toto eorpore 
et indivisa proprietas.'* 

To ascertain how far some of these opinions 
were consistent with the laws of the animal 
economy, I instituted a set of experiments, 
which formed the subject of an inaugural dis- 
sertation, published in the year 1790. It apr 
peared to me in consequence of that investiga- 
tion, that several of the above-mentioned 
opinions, viz. That opium did not act upon 
the nervous system ^ , that it acted upon the 
blood; that its effects could be extended by 
means of the one and indivisible property of 
irritability, had been founded upon reasons 
which were very unsatisfactory. 

This publication being calculated principally 
for the meridian of Edinburgh, was confined to 
that place, and the question, taken in a general 
point of view, was left undetermined. 

Since that time I find, from the perusal of a 
work, called " Medical Extracts," written by 
a gentleman of some ability, but of more 
imagination than judgment; that the opiT 
nions of Fontana are not only sanctioned by 
respectable authority, but are considered as 



generally known, understood and acted upon. 
1 have, therefore, thought it necessary to collect 
into a short point of view the facts, related by 
Fontana, and the general conclusions he drew 
from them, and to compare them with the 
principal facts, established \^y the investigation 
above alluded to. 

fbj " I destined, says Fontana, 3Q0 frogs 
for these experiments and by means of pincers 
and scissars, I laid bare the crural nerves in 
such a manner, that they were entirely free of 
every other part, and obtained about 8 or 10 
lines of nerve totally clear and in some very 
large frogs even more. I then let fall the 
nerves of each thigh into a small hollow glass, 
which received them in such a way that I can 
fill each glass with a fluid of any kind without 
Its touching the adjacent muscles. I usually 
have been able to put into these glasses, such a 
proportion of whatever I wish to try on the 
nerves, as to cover the greater part of them 
with it, without its being possible for any of 
the liquor to find its way to the thighs and mix 
with the blood. In this way I can make a 
comparison betwixt the nerves, that are en- 
venomed and those that are not j compute the 

(bj Medical Extracts 6S0. Vol. S. 



t On the infects of Opium 

time they continue to contract iS'e mviscles and 
judge of the vivacity of the motions." 

" At the end of the first ten mhuitesi stimu- 
lated the medicatecl nerves, i. e. those, to which 
the solution' of opiurn was apphed, and those 
Which were not rnedicated, and found that the 
two extremities, |;be right as \yell a3 left,, con- 
tracted with the sa.me -force and vivacity." 

" At the ehd of tidenty minutes , I tried the 
stimulation and could perceive n6 sensible dif- 
ference betwixt the motions of the ^t wo feet, 
which were almost as lively as tliose in the first 
experiment." 

" At the end of thirty ;»?7^w^<?>, the motions 
of the two feet were feeder, but alike in both." 

^' At the end o^ forty miimies, the feet scarce- 
ly contracted, but their distinct muscles were 
clearly seen to contract, when the crural nerves 
were stimulated, and the motions of these 
muscles were equally lively in each foot." 

^' At the end oi fifty minutes^ the motions 
were very small " from compression of the 
nerves," but alike in both sides." 

*^ At the end of eighty minutes^ there was 
no longer any motion to be observed jn several 
of the frogs, in whatever "way"!" sfimulafed 
either the crural nerves that were medicated, 
or those which were not so.*' 



on the Ldving S^tenu 9 

- V I can conceive,** adds Fontana, „ nothing 
more decisive and more certain than from this 
series of experiments, that the action of opium 
is not directly on the nerves/' 

2dly. Again^y<r/ Fontana immersed the 
hearts of various animals immediately taken 
Jfrom the thorax, into a strong aqueous solution 
of opium, infusion of bark and simple water, 
of equal temperatures and found that these 
organs were deprived of irritability, and that 
they ceased to contract, or to be capable of 
being excited to contract, equally soon on im- 
mersion into water as into a solution of opium 
or infusion of bark. 

3dJy. H^ next injected an aqueous solution 
of opium into the jugular vein of several rabbits, 
and found that it produced death instant?i- 
neously ; from this he concludes, as the heart 
is not furnished with nerves, and having proved 
that the solution of opium does not exhaust 
the irritability of the heart, that it must occasion 
death only by producing an alteration in the 
condition of the fluids. 

; Jhe experiments with the 300 frogs, ^s 
related by Fontana, I repeated though upon a 
smaller scale, yet sufficient to ascertain the 

(c) Fonlana on Poisons, Vol. 2i p. 352—364. French 

Rlition, " • ' 

B 



10 On the Ejects of Option 

truth of it. I followed the method described 
by Fontana, and I found the fact to be cot- 
rectly as he relates it ; the divided extremity 
of the crural nerves, bared for the space of half 
an inch arid im'mersed in solutions of opium of 
various degrees of strength, was ri'ot more af- 
fected than If the same nerves had been im- 
mersed in water, and the irritability of thfe 
muscles, to which they wxre distributed, was 
not in the l^ast degree more altered. 

Althougli I admit the accuracy of thfese ex- 
periments, I am inclined to call in question the 
sufficiency of them for the purpose they w^ere 
designed. There is a considerable difference 
betwixt the sentient and the divided extremity 
of a nerve. This operation, even if the struc- 
ture of the divided part was capable of receiving 
and communicating impressions, must in a 
great measure have had the effect of destroying 
its sensibility, and though the solution was not 
only applied to the divided extremity, but iilso 
enveloped the surface of the nerve for a con- 
siderable distance, this surface must also have 
lost in consequence of being separated fi'om the 
muscles by *' scissars and pincers" so much of 
the usual quantum of sensibility as to be un- 
equal to transmit any effect produced upon it. 

Respecting the second series of experiments, 
they are so contrary to all that repeated ex- 



on the Living St/stem. 11 

perlence has taught, so contrary to the obser- 
vations of Ilaller, Whytt and Munro, who, 
notwithstanding the difference of opinion they 
held, on some points connected with the ope- 
ration of opium, unequivocally agreed on this 
head, (viz. that it destroyed the irritability) that 
I cannot but conjecture, some unobserved 
circumstances must have diverted the usual 
accuracy of Fontana from its natural bias. 

The conclusion drjiwq from the third series 
of experiments rests partly upon thp accuracy 
of the second, gnd partly upon the supposition 
that the heart has not any nerve§, which is 
concluded because the knife of the, anatomist 
has not discovered them; but except this 
opinion is maintained upon some other ground, 
it can be considered only as a petitio principli ; 
the want of detection proves nothing either 
way, as it is nothing more than an argument 
of non-existence drawn from invisibility. Fur- 
ther, the experiment proves too much; the 
animal died instantaneously, on the injection of 
the solution into the jugular vein ; the circu- 
lation must of course be interrupted ; by what 
means was this sudden, this momentary effect 
communicated to the distant parts of the 
animal ? 

I liave thus stated the proofs and arguments 
founded upon them, adduced by Fontana, as 



B2 



12 On the Effects of Ophim 

accurately and at as much length, as the limits 
of this paper will allow ; let us now see how 
the case stands when reduced to the test of 
experiment. 

Does Opium act upon the Irritability of the 
Muscular Fibre f 

(d) Experiment 1. 

The heart of a frog was immersed into half 
an ounce of an aqueous solution of opium, in 
the proportion of half a dram and six grains of 
opium to one ounce of water, of the tem- 
perature of 44% whilst contracting 25 times in a 
minute. Two minutes after immersion, it 
contracted only 15 times in a minute : after 8 
minutes the contractions had ceased, and could 
not be excited again by any mechanical 
stimulus. 

(e) Experiment 2. 

The heart of a moderate sized rabbit whilst 
contracting 23 times in a minute, was im- 
mersed into an ounce of the above solution, of 
the temperature of the room; four minutes 
after immersion, it exhibited eighteen con- 

(d) Vid. p. 5, Inaugural. Dissertat. Exp. 1. 
(O Vid. Inaug. Dissert, p. 7. Exp. 4. 



en the Living Si/stem, It 

tractions in a minute j |«n minutes after im- 
mersion, six or eight contractions, and after 
twelve minutes had entirely ceased, and couli 
not be excited anew to contract. 

(f) Exptrimeiit 3. 

Another heart immersed in an ounce of i 
stronger solution, only exhibited three or fou: 
strong contractions, on the period of immersior 
and afterwards was irritated in vain. 

(g) Experiment 4. 

The heart of another rabbit was placed in a 
wine glass and three drams of the strong solu- 
tion poured on, whilst contracting 50 times in 
a minute : after 3 minutes spontaneous con- 
tractions had ceased, but irritated with a 
needle a few contractions were excited : after 
the lapse of 5 minutes no contractions could be 
excited. 

In order to examine how far the opium con- 
tained in the soldtion contributed to produce 
the above rapid exhaustion of irritability, 

(f) Vid. p. 10. Inaugural Dissert. Exp. 7. 
(f; Vid. p. 10 & 11. Exp. 8, 



H On the Effects of Opium 

(h) Experiment 5. 
The heart of a frog, contracting 24 times in 
a minute, was placed in half an ounce of water, 
'.emperature 44 v It continued to contract in 
he water for 16 minutes, and when removed, 
contractions could be excited in the organ, by 
pechanically stimulating it, for the space of 
\ix minutes longer. 

1 " •- ¦ •' - ^ 

(i) Experiment 6. 

The heart of a rabbit contracting 50 times 
:n a minute, was placed in water of the tem- 
perature of the room. It contracted spon- 
taneously for 20 minutes, and when removed 
continued irritable for the space of 10 minutes 
longer. 

Can the Effect cf Opium be communicated to 
distant Parts independent of the Assistance of 
the Circulation f. 

{k) Experiment 7. 

The sternum of a frog was carefully elevated 
and the heart removed, forty drops of the strong 
solution were injected into the. stomach. In 
15 minutes the animal was stupified and para- 

(h) VId. p. 6. Exp. 3. Inaug. Dissert. 
(i) Vid. p. 8. Exp. 6. 
(k) Vid, p. 28. Exp. 20. 



- 'mthe Living System, iJ 

iytlc, in' ^26' ittinutes convulsed : after 40 
minutes, voluntary niolion had ceased : after an 
hour and ten minutes it was dead and the irri- 
tability in all the muscles was deUroyed. 

(1) 'Experiment 8. 
Tliirty drops were injected into another frog^ 
after the removal of the heart ; it lived an hour 
and 15 minutes, and after death the irritability 
Wfis exhausted, 

(m) Experiment 9. 

Twenty drops were injected into a third : It 
lived an hour and twelve minutes, and the 
state of irritability was the same as in . the 
preceding. 

Does the quantity of Opium sufficient to occa- 
sion Death, effect this by viducing a Change 
in the tondition of the Blood ? 

(n) Experiment 10. 

By some former experiments No. 17 & 35 (oj 
it had been found that 33 drops of the solution 

x)f opiunt injected into the jugular vein of*^ 
' ' ) ' ' 

rO Vid. Inaug. Dissert; p. 29. Exp. 21. 
(m) Vid. p. 30. Exp. 22. 
r»; Vid. p. 74. Exp. 46. 
(o) Vid. p. 20 & 65. . 



1^ On the Effects of Opium 

^¦^hit would occasion death in the course of ^ 
hw minutes and exhaust the irritability of the 
.muscular fibre. Another rabbjt was selected 
and 33 drops injected into the crural vein; no 
other effect resulted from this but some degree 
of stupefaction. Twenty-si^ minutes after- 
wards 33 more drops were injected into the 
'irural vein of the other limb. 

The animal in a short time became more 
languid, but was not convulsed ^ its pulse was 
rendered more slow and feeble, at the period of 
36 minutes from the injection into the first 
crural vein. 

Seven hours from the first injection, the 
animal was convalescent, and the day following 
it fed as usual. 

The occasion did not offer to make a com- 
putation of the quantity of opium which would 
be necessary to kill a rabbit when introduced 
by a crural vein, but the ornission of this does 
not detract from the force of the evidence which 
the above experiment supplies, that the cause 
of the death of the animal, when the solution is 
introduced by the jugular vein, must arise from 
some other state, than a change in the condition 
of the blood, and that the effect of opium must 
have been extended over the entire system, by 
other means than the circulation ; for, what 
reason can be given why the mass of fluids should 



on the Living System, 17 

not be altered, when the solution was intro- 
duced by the crural as well as by the jugular 
vein > but upon the other theory, the solution 
of this difficulty is easy, and accords with the 
whole series of experiments, (p) 

The life of a rabbit cannot be sustained ^ 
^iHlniite without the action of the lieatt ; when 
the solution of opium is ihjectdd Into th^ 
jugular vein, it is applied to the inward surface 
of the heart, mixed with a very smaH quantity 
of blood, and can then exert effects upon that 
organ as instantaneously as if the heirt was 
immersed in it, as in experiment 2d Cq), the 
'action of opium being thus directed against 
the irrltkble fibre, the exhaustion of that part 
would immediately succeed, of bourse the 
animal must die ; but when the same fluid is 
injected into the cn^ral vein, it doe^ not reach 
the heart until it has been mixed and diluted 
with a very considerable portion of blood, ^o 
that no quantity of blood which the heart could 
contain during one period of dilatation, would 
be impregnated with any great quantity of the 
solution of opium. The consequences there- 
fore, which folIoVO'ed from the injection of 
opium into the jugular vein, supposing that it 

(p) Vid. Inaug. Dissert, p. 119. NoteC. 
(q) Vid. Inaug. Disieft. p. 17. Exp. 14. 
C 



18 On the EJlctsqf Opium 



V I 



acted immediately oa the heart, could not iii 
this instance be ej^pected to take place. 

(r) . Experiment 1 1 . , , • 

^, > A triangular piece of bone was takei>ffrom 
jthe cranium ot a frog, and the dura and pia 
mater removed; eight drops of the. strong so- 
lution were injected upon the brain;, a, tew 
drops wre lost. Intone; minute the a;>imal 
Avas convulsed, in three minutes it w^s, djcai 
On examination the irritability in every p/irt of 
the voluntary muscles was destroyed, neither 
compression, of the nerves nor mechanical irri- 
tation could., excite aAy. contractions in them. 
The heart had not lost its motion. 

(s) Experimeiit \2. 
• In another experiment 6f the same kind, the 
animal was immediately *and generally con- 
vulsed, and was dead in one minute. When 
the heart vvas exposed it was found contracting 
42 times tli-a minute. The irritability of this 
organ was not lost uiitil three hours after. 

. (t) Experiment 1%, 
A portion of the cranium of a rabbit was 
elevated in like manner, and 40 drops injected 

(r) Vid. Inaug, Dissert, p. 49» Exp. 29. 
(s) Vid. p. 50. Exp. 31, 
(t) Vid. p. 51. Exp. 33. 



ojV the Living Sijstcm, 19 

¦ • - ¦ • ¦ ^ •'-¦ ' \.-n''r 

oh tlie surface of tHc'l^rain. At fii>t thi; anjmal ^ 

appeared lethargic and tottered. After ten 

minutes it was violently convulsed, and m tl)e 

space of one minute and an half more, wai 

dead. When the thorax was opened the lieart ' 

was/bund contracting with considerable forpc. 

The irritability was exhausted in all the 
muscles subservient to voluntary' motion ; they 
were repeatedly irritated, but iv\ vain. 

In these experiments, it is clear, tTiat opium 
has a very powerful ^nd instantaneous action ' 
upon the brain, that it is diffused oyer the* 
whole nervons system, evinced both \iy' the 
general convulsions preceding death, and the^ 
total consumption of irritability in the volun- 
tary muscles, and which was equally as com- ' 
plete as if the opium had been applied imme- 
diately to the parts themselves. 

It was next exarhined, if when opium is in- 

^ troduce.d into some other organ, its effects are 

extended hy the nervqus system to distant 

parts. 

'(v) Experiment 14. 

All the parts as near as possible to the pelvis 
of a frog, on both sides, were divided, leaving 
the ischiatic nerves uninjured. These were" 
afterwards secluded from the air, by the di- 
(pj yid.Inaiig. Dissert, p. 59. Exp. 38--39. 
' c 2 



20 * On the Effects of Opiian 

vided edges of the skin being drawn togetl^er 
by slender threads. Three frogs ^were ex- 
perimented upon. 

Twenty drops of solution were injected into 
the stomach of one frog. The animal lived 
four hours after. 

On examination after death, the irritability 
was destroyed in all the voluntary muscles. 

Into another frog thirty drops were injected : 
After 1 6 minutes the animal was convulsed ^ 
the extremities below the knee w^hich had no 
communication with the superior part of the 
body, except by the undivided ischiatic nerves, 
were likewise affected by convulsions, and in 
two hours and ten niinutes, the animal was 
dead. 

The ligatures which united the divided edges 
of the skin of the thighs were then separated, 
and the ischiatic nerves exposed ; they were 
compressed ; the compression of the nerve on 
one side, produced a slight contraction, in one 
of the muscles in the lower part of the limb, 
but when repeated, no contraction followed ^ 
the compression of the nerve of the other limb, ' 
occasioned no contractions. . The irritability in 
all the other, muscles was exhausted. 

Into a third frog, prepared in like manner, 
forty drop's were injected: After 15 minutes* 
the animal was convulsed ; after the space of 



4)tj^ the Living Sljjslein, SJL . 

two houi^jit was de«d. Compression of the 
nerves did not excite the least motion in any of 
the muscles beneath, and when the skin was 
removed, the application of salt was equally as 
ineffectual, not the slightest degree of contrac- 
tion was rendered visible. 

From the event of these last related experi- 
ments wc are instructed, that the effect off 
opium is extended to the most distant parts of 
the body, although the only communication 
which remains between the extreme parts and 
the body itself, is by the continuity of nerves, 
and these palpably not in a state best adapted 
to convey impressions. 

It yet remained to be examined if by any 
other communication the effect of opium could 
be extended to distant parts, if the supposed 
integrity and indivisibility of the irritable prin- 
ciple was capable of doing it. 

(w) Experiment 15. 
The spine of a frog was divided above that 
part from whence the nerves issue which supplv 
^ the inferior extremities ; care w^as taken not to 
wound any other part. 

After this operation, the muscles of the in- 
ferior extremities retained their irritability, and 
though the animal had lost the power of volun- 

(w) Vld. Inaiig. Dijsert. p^ 62* Exp. 42, 



22 071 the Effects of Opium 

taiy motioti intHem, it had strength to drag ' 
them after its body.' ' j-:ji^::. 

Into the stomach of a frog 'thW prepared, 
fbrty drops' of the solution Were injected ; ' 
seventeen minutes after, all 'the- parts of the 
animal above the point of the division of the 
spine, v^ere violently convulsed, and in one 
hour and forty minutes the animal was dead^. 

The upper part of the body was then sepa- 
rated from the lower, at the* part where the 
spine had been divided, and the following was 
the state of irritability in the' different parts. 

To the muscles of the breast and those of the 
superior extremities, salt was applied, but 
without exciting '•¦ the: least contraction or 
motion. 

The iliac nerves below the point of the di-' 
vision of the spine were compressed ; viVid and 
frequently repeated contractions were excited 
in all the muscles of the legs and thighs. 

This experiment was repeated several times 
atid invariably presented the same result. .All 
the muscles of the body above the point of the 
division of the spine, lost the irritability; on 
the contrary, below the point of division, the 
irritability of the muscles remaine.d unimpaired, 
after the death of the animal, as .was rendered 
evident both by th^ compression of the nerves 
and the applicatioa of salt. 



., , <?^y/f(2^ ^nivg, S^tqn^ , 33 

more minutely, another experiipca^. jty^a*; 
made. 

(x) Experiment 16. 

The ischiatic nerves were divided on both 

,F.I4^s inr^^o^; near.jtb^ir ^xit from, the paelvis ; 

.this operatioa;doe$ not render the limb entirely 
paralytic, The: .animal still possesses a volun- 
tary power over the muscle? of the thigh, in a 

, considerable] degree : Thei upper point of the 
\<zg is rendered n^rly parajy tic,,, the. lower 
point of the, leg and feet are rendered entirely- 
paralytic, ;l .^ilt i(, .-loiiiiqo oih iL 

Into thef^stonach of a frog^,,thus prepared; 
thirty drops; of the solutiop ,were injected j after 
21 minutc3:the ajijmal was convulsed j the 
convulsion^ ^extenrted-to the tbighs; the leo-s 
and feet wqrC; not in the smallest degree. afc- 
fccted by xoiwulsipns. In one hour andniS 
minutes, the animal was dead. 

The application of salt to the inferior ex- 
tremities, the Jo^vj^r joints of the legs and feet, 
produced rapid and frequent contractions ; the 

jnuscles of the thighs at the first did not con- 
tract, but after the salt had been applied some 
time, feeble contractions were excited. Tjie 
salt applied to the muscles of the superior ex- 
tremities and to those gf the breast and back, 
O) .Vid. Inaug, DLssert. p. 66. Exp. 41. 



94 071 tht Effects of Opium 

wis incapabk of eXcitihg^ the smallest degree 
of contraction. 



.\ ,)(' 



In this manner I submitted the experiments 
and opinions of the Abbe Fontana, to an 
accurate investigation, and I did not draw con- 
clusions different from his without the convic- 
tion that the experiments which I have related 
;iwere carefully made and many times repeated, 
and in the preseriee of those whose bias led 
them to favour the opinions of the Italian phy- 
siologist. I shall therefore conclude this part 
of the paper, with 4 general entimeration of 
the facts which have been ascertained. 

The first series of experiments proves that 
opium applied to the muscular fibre (the heart) 
exhausts or consumes, the irritability of that 
organ. Vid. Exp. 1st. 3d. 3d and 4th. 

The second series of the aboVe quoted ex- 
periments proves that the effect of opium fe 
transmitted to distant parts of the animal body 
when the agency of the circulation is both 
withheld and destroyed, and in as rapid a 
manner as when the circulation of the blood is 
entire and vigorous. Vid. Exp. 7th. 8th and 9th. 

The third proves to a certain extent, that 
opium either does not exert any immediate 



on the Living Sjjstem. 25 

action upon the blood, or that this fluid is an 
insufficient medium to convey it to distant parts 
of the system. Vid. Exp. 10th. 

The fourth series proves that the effect of 
opium is directly exerted upon the nervous 
system. Exp. 11th, 12th, and 13th. That in 
proportion to the unity and integrity of this 
system, the effects of ' opium are extended to 
distant parts. Exp. 8th and 9th. That where 
this integrity is only partial, the effects are only 
partial. Vid. Exp. 16th. That where the 
integrity is interrupted, the effect of opium is 
interrupted. Exp. 15th. And finally, that the 
7ina et indivisa proprietas of irritability is in- 
adequate in any degree to extend or commu- 
nicate the effegts or operation of the above- 
mentioned power (y). 

(y) In Ihe Dissertation which has been so often quoted, 
the above experiracnts will be found supported by many 
others, the tendency of all which verge to the same point. 
In that, the general criterion which waj established to 
denote the influence of opium, was founded on the ob- 
servation of convulsions preceding death, and the loss of 
irritability in the muscular fibre after death. The quan- 
tity of this remaining was denoted by the frequency and 
strength of the contractions upon the application of 
common salt. It was, after many (rials uith other sub- 
stances, found to be the most certain and effectual test. 
The manner in which salt produces this effect is no lc>i 
beautiful than singular. It does not so much appear lo 

D 



26 On ihe Efftcts of Opium 



PART THE. SECOND, 

fit l^Ai 



ittM P i^l^,:tW^U^'<kotii^c operation of opiiipi f' 

Ever, .sincp..., the introduction of. this most 
powerfuV^nd e-^cacipus ^rtkle intq the ^jist of 
^ the Materia- ^iedica,- 3tnuch, diversity of opinion 
has arisen aqiofigst medical'men, respecting the 
qualities it po^ssesses. It .would be foreign to 
Ojur.jpuvpose to enter into a discussion respecting 
thq ; various, theories A^v^high at different times 
h^,ve prevailed upon this subject, as experience 
and a clearer insight ,into the nature of the 
animal machine, have exploded all other opi- 
nions except two (opposite indeed to each 
other), namely, the x)ne which explains the 
operation of this power by attributing a stimu- 

excite a muscle (o contract, because a certain portion of 
irritability is present, as it appears to bestow irritability, 
if this principle is not too much extinguished and the 
viialiry gone, A muscle which is incapable of contracting 
on the application of a mechanical stimulus, and is re- 
laxed and pale, will, on the application of salt, exhibit very 
frequent and strong contractions, assume graciually a 
beautiful florid colour, and will then become obedient 16 
Giber stimuli, to which before.it was insensible. Thus it 
will be found to be a belter restorer of irritability to the 
muscular fibre, than muriatic acid, related by Humbolt. 



on \(he J^ivhlg Si/stciiu 



•J/ 



lant quality to it, and the other which contends 
that' the effects of Us use prove it-tcxibe^' 
sedative 

That ii i^ oi much importance to ii^^^ciuun 
which of these opposing theories approaches 
to tho truth, is evident from this consideration,, 
that while the advocate for the stimulant effect 
of this power, will hesitate in the administration 
of it, in those states of the body which indicate 
an encrease of action, the supporter of the 
sedative effect, will boldly trust to it, as the 
best and most effective means to remove or 
diminish that condition of the system. And, 
indeed, such is the imperfect state of medical 
science, that neither party will be in want of 
great and respectable, medical authorities in 
support of the two opposite modes of practice. 
.'.To arrive in spme degree at a soliition of this 
difficulty, and to attempt to establish the ope- 
ration of opium on a more secure basis, is the 
design of the following pages. In this pursuit, * 
I shall confine myself principally to the inves- 
tigation of the effects of opium by experiments 
n?ade upon the living and healthy animai. If 
at anyj time doubtful appearances take place,- 
which render the e;ffects obscure or not easily 
referable to either opinion, an explanation 
will be attempted, by calling in the assistance 
of that analogy which may be drawn from the 
d2 



28 071 the Effects of Opium 

effects of those powers whose operation is uhi- 
versally acknowledged. For instance, if it be 
found that opium destroys the action of a 
muscular fibre on the instant of its application, 
and it be contended that this affords prima 
facie evidence of its power to diminish action, 
and consequently that it is sedative, I should be 
induced to examine what are the appearances 
presented on the application of aether or 
spirit of wine to a similar muscular fibre, and 
if it be found that these powers destroy action 
in like manner as was effected by opium, the 
conclusion would be, that the single effect of 
diminished action does not constitute a positive 
fact favourable to either side of the question. 

To bring the ppint at issue into as narrow a 
space as possible, it might be thought proper 
that I should give some definition of the terms 
sedative and stimulant : If mankind were 
agreed about the meaning of words this might 
not be difficult to do, but to avoid any unneces- 
sary difference of opinion, and as it is proposed 
to investigate certain points by the way of ex- 
periment, I would defer any definition of the 
above terms until such facts are established as 
will obviate any ambiguity, 



on ike Living Si^stem, 29 

CHAPTER I. 

The effect of different powers applied to the 
Hearts of Animals ivhilst in the Thorax and 
in a State of Action. 

EXPERIMENT l. 

The sternum of a full grown frog was raised 
and the heart exposed ; 

Hours. Minutes 

1. 35. Ten drops of water containing a 

grain of opium in solution were 

poured upon the heart, beating 6 1 . 
38. The action of the heart has greatly 

diminished ; contracting not more 

than 45 in a minute. 
45. Contractions not more than 38. 
50. Contractions 29 in a minute, and 

feeble. 
— Ten drops more of the same solution 

(i. e. one grain) wxre poured 

upon the heart. 
55. Heart contracts 28 in a minute. 

2. — Twenty-eight contractions in a mi- 

nute. 
10. Not more than 20 contractions in a 
minute : animal beginning to be 
convulsed. 



30 0/t,srt:{ie'iEffec(s . v/^ Opium 

Hours. Mhiulos. 

30. Convulsicjns-when the animal is 
touched, the heart contracts very 
• '^ fceblyand very slow. 

bstii -50,. Nd^- motion can be excited in the 
animal by irritating it,' but' the 
heart still continues to contract. 
.The .heait Bid not cease, until 27 
minutes after. 
4. liT. When the application of a mecha- 
nical stimulus produced no'effect, 
. . either upon the heart or any of 

the organs of voluntary motion. 
: ' :')':r' -. Opium 2 grains. 

EXPERIMENT 2. 

The heart of -another frog w^as exposed in 
the skme mariner as the preceding: It beat 
5^ int'a minute'. 

H. M. 

1. 45. Five:, drops of the saiiie solution 
containing half a grain of opium 
were poured' upon the heart. An 
inatanianeaus diminution of mo- 
tion suoce.eded. 
48. Heart beats only 30;: the animal 
.. : ] --stnigf l^^;;>4ol^ptJy :, _tjfe h^aft ex- 
p.eii.en<^e4 atennipctrary cessation 
of action (Jiiringr th^ struggles. 



' on the Livh^ 'Sifsterk^^ '81 

Hours* Minute. 

'^•v Heart beats 28 'in a miiiate : animal 

-continiie^'Wstrug^^ tWe^pulsa- 

' tiori' was '"'hot ^numbered again 

'trtitil ' ;^ 

•:v^i i£(i'ar^'*^af ^K^'^Htf stronger ^fe ap- 

V'.. Tive''*drop's ' more were poured on, 
heart beat iriimediately after 
only 24;' |o'- • • ' •> 

13. 25 Contractions irt a -minute. 

23. 21 Contractibris^h ammuto. 

33. 16 Contractions in a minute. 
^53. 1^ Contractions, or 17: ' ''''^^ 
3. '^. '•' Heart beat 12 in a mif1itte> f-lTte 
animal convulsed when toUc^hed : 
It was not dea<l eartier thafi two 
hours and an half from this 
•time. 3\ 4$'° : Opium 1 grain. 

EXPERik^]^ 3. 

'. The heart of -' Another frog was 
prepared as the foregoing: ten 
drops were poured upon the heart, 
formed with eight drops of water 
and two of tlie solution com- 
.puted to -contain l-5th of a grain. 
The heart beating 60 in a minute. 
Animal struggled violently. 



82 On the Ejects of Opium 

Hours. Minutes. 

35. Heart feeble and beating only 53. 
40. Only 50 contractions, but they ap- 
pear more strong and vigorous. 
45. 43 Strong contractions in a minute. 
50. One drop of the solution with four 

of water were poured on, 
55. Heart makes 40 strong vigorous con- 
tractions. 
3. 10. 43 Strong J and vigorous contrac- 
tions. 
15. 47 Strong and vigorous contractions. 
40. Only 39 contractions in a minute. 
After this the contractions appeared to vary 
with the struggling of the animal : it was not 
dead at six o'clock 3 had never been convulsed, 
and was then killed. 



EXPERIMENT 4. 



M. 



Heart exposed as before beating 54. 

35. One drop of the solution and nine 
of water, computed to contain 
1-lOth of a grain of opium were 
applied to the heart. Little or 
no struggle ensued. 

38. Heart beats 59 in a minute : and con- 
tractions apparently more strong. 

43. Heartbeats 61 y strong contractions. 



oft the Living System, 33 

Hoars. Micutet. 

48. Heart bc^ats more il-cbly, not more 

than 06 in a minute. 
53. Heart still bt^ats 56 in a niinute. 

4. — Heart beats no more than 47 : ani- 

mal struggles ; the heart is always 
slower for one minute after 
struggling. 

5. — Heart' beats 52. 

6. — Heart beats 49. 

.The animal was now killed, as nothing 
further could be collected from permitting it 
to live. 

EXPERIMENT 5. 
Upon an heart beating 58, the same quan- 
tity of the solution was poured on at 4^- lo"* : 
i. e. 10 grains. 

H. M. 

4. 15. The animal struggled. 

17. Heart beats 56 in a minute. 

20. Heartbeats 58. 

25. Heart beats only 46, but the con- 
tractions are strong. 

\j. Heart beats 48 : Five more drops of 
equal strength were poured on. 

40. Heart beats 48, with little dif- 
ference in strength. ^ 

43. Heart beats 48 : strong and vi- 
gorous contractions. 

£ 



34. On the Effects of Ophcm 

Honrs. Winutes. 

6. — Heart beats 50, it continued to beaf 
strong and vigorous, for some 
hours; when the animal was. 
^ killed. 



EXPERIMENT 6. 

Upon the heart of another animal, ten drops 
were poured, which contained by computatFon 
only one-twentieth of a grain of opium, (a) 
after the application, the contractions were en- 
creased from 50 to 54": After this they varied 
every five or six minutes, and continued near 
50 for more than five hours, when the animal 
was killed. 

EXPERIMENT T. 

Cold water w^as applied to a heart beating 
56. The contractions immediately became less 
frequent, not more than 49 r ^)fcftef five minutes, 
they rose to 57, and after ten minutes, were 
beating 61. 

EXPERIMENT k 

A second application of cold water to another 
heart, beatiiig 53, after being exposed,. appeared 
to encrease the contractions which were counted 

(a) This solution was made by puUing one drop of the 
solution of Igr. to I'bgrs, into 20 dropsef water. 



oji the jLivi?ig Sj/siem. 35 

Immediately after the application, to 58 : After 
fiv^ minutes, they were 62; but they varied 
much as the animal struggled. 

EXPERIMENT 9. 

JFi/h Opium repeated. 

A solution was made which contained one 
grain in thirty drops. 

'^ HoDfl. Minutes. 

3. 12. The heart beating 52, ten of the 

drops were poured on. 
14. Heart beat no more than 49. 
16. Heart beat only 36. * 

18. Heart beats 36 ; animal struggles : 

It continued nearly the same till 
T;. five o'clock, when ten more drops 

were poured on. These were not 

attended with any perceptible 

alteration. 
~:j. Heart beats 26, ton more drops 

were poured on: these did not 

either make any visible change. 
¦^0. Animal violently convulsed when 

touched. 
^'>. I "j. Only 18 very feeble motions arc 

now exhibited; convulsed when 

touched as before. The convul- 



$6 On the Effects of Opium 

Hours. Minutes. 

sions appear to make very little 
alteration in the pulsation of the 
heart. 
50. Feeble convulsive motions when 
irritated : Heart beats feebly 17. 

7. 45. No motion of any kind can be ex- 

cited, whatever part is irritated 
with the point of a needle or 
knife, the heart yet moves. 

8. — The heart yet moves very feebly, 

about 15 or 16 times in a minute. 
The skin of the extremities was 
now removed, and salt applied to 
the bared muscles. No contrac- 
tions ensued ; the crural nerves 
were then exposed, and com- 
pressed, but no contractions fol- 
lowed, in the muscles below. The 
heart moved feebly 15 minutes 
after this operation. 

EXPERIMENT 10. 

JVifh Spirits, of IVine. 



M. 



35. The heart of a frog was exposed, 
and whilst beating b6, twenty 
drops of spirit of v/inc rectified, 
v/erc poured upon it. The pul- 
sation instantly diminished. 
3 



on the Living Si/stem, 37 



Hour* Minatet 



365. The heart is quite motionless. The 
contractility of this organ was 
never recovered again, but the 
extremities were contractile near 
two hours after. 

EXPERIMENT il. 

Up07i the Heart of another Frog beating 58. 

H. M. 

0. 2. Five drops of spirits of wine with 
five drops of water were poured. 
5. Heart beating 48; the animal 
struggles. 

20. Five drops more were poured on, 
the motion of the heart instantly 
diminished. 

22. Heart beats only 30. 

40. Heart yet beats 29, or 30. 

50. Heart beats only 26. The extre- 
mities are contractile, but not 
greatly so. 
7. 10. Heart beats not more than 18, or 
20 ; extremities are not contrac- 
tile when stimulated. 

SO. Animal quite dead, no contractions 
could be excited in any part by 
the application of any mechanical 
stimulus. 



3^ On the Effects of Opium 

EXPERIMENT 12. 

With jEther. 



Hours. Minutes. 



8. — The heart of a frog exposed, beat 
56. Twenty drops of vitriolic 
aether were poured upon it, after 
the firs.t three drops were poured 
on, the heart ceased to pulsate for 
two minutes. 

3. It exhibited a few feebjc motions. 

4. It had entirely ceased : the stimulus 

of the point of a lancet did not 
excite any motion : the extremi" 
ties were contractile an hour af- 
terwards. 

EXPERIMENT 13. 

8. 50. Upon a heart beating 60, ten drops 
of vitriolic aether were poured 
and ten of water, the heart ceased 
to move after the first five drops 
were poured on. 
51|. It exhibited 25 feeble contractions. 
53. Heart was without motion, and did 
not contract on the application of 
a needle and lancet. 
The extremities contracted afterwards for an 
hour and an half when stimulated. 



on (he Living System. Q9 

From the^e foregoing experiments, no con- 
clusions appear admissible, which can assist the 
elucidation of the question. ,. ,• .; , 

In experiments 1st, 2d, 3d, and; 9th, th^ 
action of the heart was indeed instantaneously 
diminished, notwithstanding this, they are in,- 
competent to establish an opinion, that opium 
is sedative, because the same effect followed, 
and in greater degree, the application of aether 
and spirits of wine. The 4ftli experinient 
exhibits somewhat the appearJmce of ?i,,stim% 
lant operation, from the application of,Opi^m> 
and if the encreased number of pulsations of 
the heart could be fairly referable to the opi^fH 
alone, the fact would have great force. .AVhen 
the sternum of a frog is first raised, the Jieart 
generally suffers a temporary diminution in the 
number of j pulsations in a minute, and it not 
unfrequently happens likewise, that. t,hq strug- 
gles of the animal occasion a momentary sus- 
pension of the pulsation ; when exposed to the 
air for a few minutes, or after being at rest, the 
heart generally recovers a greater force and 
frequency of pulsations. 

To this, cause, as we)} asj to the, effect pro 
duced by opium, may the encreased action of 
the heart be attributed. The same effect also 
followed tlie application of water, but this 
favours somewhat the supposition, tliat the 



40 On the Effects of Opium 

effect in experiment 4, was owing to a stlmu^' 
lant operation, for such would be the applica- 
tion of water. The temperature of a frog 
is only 44, the temperature of water was 
equal to that of a room within doors, which 
was not less than from 60 to 70. The frequent 
variations of the pulse which occurred from the 
struggles of the animal, would likewise greatly 
diminish the force of any conclusions which 
might be drawn respecting the effects of any of 
the powers applied. The only deduction which 
can fairly be admitted is, that no difference of 
effect was observable betwixt the application 
of opium and strong stimuli, sufficient to justify 
an opinion that these powers had a different 
operation. 



Rabbits zoere the Subjects of the next 
Experiments. 

EXPERIMENT 14. 

The Thorax of a full-grown rabbit was 
6peined, and the heart exposed by the removal 
of the sternum. The animal was seized with 
'convulsions, and died in the space of one 
minute. The contractions of the heart con- 
tinued, for more than half an hour after. 



on the Living System. 41 

Houn. Minute*. 

10. 21. The ventricles had ceased to move, 
the auricles yet exhibited a feeble 
vibratory motion. 
31. The left auricle was without mo- 
tion : In the right auricle a tre- 
mulous motion was observable, 
once or twice in a minute. Ten 
drops of a solution of opium which 
contained 1 grain in 16 of water, 
were poured gently upon the heart. 
Several encreased contractions of 
the ventricles followed in quick 
succession. 

35. The heart was again motionless in 

every part. 

36. The solution was poured on again 

in the same quantity, but pro- 
duced only one contraction, in 
the right auricle. 
10. 37. The pericardium was stripped off: 
a feeble motio« was excited by 
this cause, in the right auricle. 
When the heart was again at rest, 
the solution was a third time ap- 
plied; two or three quick con 
tractions followed. 



¥1 On the Effects of Opium 

ll^urs. Minutes. 

40. Contractility of the heart entirel^^- 
exhausted : no motion could be 
excited, either by opium or an}^ 
mechanical stmiulus. 



EXPERIMENT 15. 

With Water. 

To examine- if the encreased contractions- 
which followed in the last experiment the ap- 
plication of opium to th€ heart, were referable 
to the quantity of opium, or were to be ascribed 
to the mechanical stimulus of the bulk of the 
fluid applied; the thorax of another rabbit 
was exposed, and after the ventricles had 
ceased to move, the right auricle exhihiting a 
tremulous motion as in the last. Ten drops of 
water equal in temperature to the solution 
were poured on, but without any contraction 
being excited : It was applied a second time, 
and with as little effect. 

EXPERIMENT 16. 

With rectified Spirits of Wine. 

The thorax of a rabbit was opened ; after the 
animal was dead, the heart continued to con- 
tract with considerable Jorce, 55 in a minute. 



m ilie Living '^S*fslcni . i ', 



11)11 rs Miii'trj 



1^2. 40. Ten drops of spirits of \vine rec- 
tified,' with five of water, were 
poured on the heart whilst con- 
40J. tracting: Force and frequency 
of the '<:ofitra\:tions' surprizingly 
encreased to 90 in a minute. 
4'3. The contractions were diminished 
both in force and frequency ; no 
more tTian 78. 
49. The pericardium was stripped off: 
Spirits of wine dilated with the same 
•quantity of water, were again 
poured upon the heart. 
/;;'. The contractions became a little 

more numerous, 75. 
:>j. A small orifice was made into the 
right ventricle, and thirty drops 
of spirits of wine were injected. 
The contractions ceased instantaneously and 
could not be excited again, by the application 
of any stimulus. 

EXPERIMEXr IT 
Witii Opium. 

The heart of another animal was exposed as 
the preceding. 



44 0?i the Effects of Opium 

Hours. Minutes. 

1. 5. Ten drops of the solution (i. e. half 
a dram of opium to one ounce of 
water) were poured upon the 
heart whilst contracting 60. 
54. Contractions encreascd both in force 
and velocity, to 78. 

7. Contractions abating of their force 

and frequency, 65. 
— The pericardium was stripped off. 

8. Solution of opium applied again in 

the same quantity. 

8 J. Contractions visibly encreased to 
72. 

10. The ventricle was perforated with 
the point of a knife, the heart 
stiU contracting with force; thirty 
drops of the solution were injected 
into the heart : motion diminished 
almost instantly, one or two con- 
tractions appearing after the in- 
jection of the solution, but not 
more. The point of a knife and 
lancet, applied afterwards, did 
not excite anv motion. 



on the Living Sijstem. 45 

EXPERIMENT 18. 

With jEther. 

The heart of another rabbit was exposed, 
and whilst contracting with great force. 

Hours. Minutes. 

2. 10. Ten drops of sether with five of 
water were poured on : encrease 
of contraction followed, but irot 
so observable, as on the appJica- 
tion of spirits of wine, or opiuii^. 

2. 14. The pericardium was taken off and 
the same quantity applied again, 
an encreased force of contractions 
was evident. The heart con- 
tracts much slower than after the 
second application of opium or 
spirits of wine, to the afore- 
mentioned animals. 

'2. 17. A small perforation was made -in the 
heart, 30 drops of aether were 
thrown in ; motion ceased in- 
stantly, and no contractions could 
be excited by mechanically ' sti- 
mulating the heart. 

EXPERIMENT 19. 

Ten drops of the spiritus volatilis aromaticus 
were applied upon anotlier heart, in a similar 






46 On the ILffecls of Opium 

condition witli the foregoing, which was fol- 
lowed by an encrcasc both of force and fre- 
quency in the contractions ; after the injection 
of 30 drops into the cavity of the heart, the 
same loss of contractility was apparent. 

EXPERIMENT 20. 

The thorax of another rabbit was opened, 
and after the comoilsions had ceased at 

Hours. Minutes. 

5. 31. Ten drops of water were poured 
upon the surface of the heart, 
, whilst contracting with force, but 
no apparent alteration was pro- 
duced. 

33. The contractions have not dimi- 

nished in frequency, but the force 
appears less. 

34. The pericardium was stripped off: 

Contractians greatly augmented 
by this operation. 
36. Water applied again, a slight dimi- 
nution of contractions ensued. 

38. Contractions very frequent, but 

feebler. 

39. A few drops of water applied again j 

a momentary diminution of con- 
tractions ensued. 

3 



on the Living Sjptem, ^4J 

Hours. Miuutet. 

41. Contractions have returned to their 
former frequency, but the force 
greatly diminished. 

The light ventricle was perforated, and 30 
drops of water injected -, they appeared to make 
little or no alteration. The contractions had 
not ceased 51 minutes after this time. 

In these last enumerated experiments, the 
following similar effects' were observable, from 
the application of aether, spirits of wine, spiritus 
volatilis aromaticus and opium. 

1st. Encreased force and frequency of the 
contraction of the heart upon the application 
of the above-mentioned powers to that organ. 

2d. A diminution of force and frequency, in 
the contractions, in the space of two minutes 
afterwards. 

3d. The same effect, but in a less degree, 
produced upon the second application of the 
same substances. 

4th. The entire cessation of motion in the 
heart when the same substances were injected 
into the cavity, in a quantity greater than what 
was applied to the surface of the heart. 

From this last consideration, I am inclined to 
attribute the <lifferent effects, i. e. the encreased 
action in the first instance, and the diminished 
action in tlic second, wliich api^car on the ap- 



45 On the Effects of Opi'iun 

plication of the same • substance in a smaller 
and larger quantity, not to any difference of 
operation in the substance itself, but as referable 
to the condition of the organ acted upon, 
and quantity of power acting upon it. 

SECTION 2. 

Ophun, Spirit of Wine and the Spiritus Vo- 
latilis AromaticuSy tJirozvn into the stomach 
of Animals. 

EXPERIMENT 2i. 

The skin was dissected from the thorax and 
upper part of the abdomen of a frog. The 
heart could distinctly be perceived to beat 
through the integuments, 56 in a minute. 

Hours. MiniUes. 

11. 34. Thirty drops of a solution contain- 

ing three grains of opium, were 

thrown into the stomach ' by a 

small glass tube. 
37. Heart beats no more than 45 : 

animal feeble. 
42. Heart beats so feebly that it can 

scarce be numbered : 

12. — About 30 the animal convulsed : Its 

hind le^s extended. 



ofi the Living Sijsttm, 49 



Hours. Minutes 



The heart cannot, through the in- 
teguments, be discerned to beat. 

1 . — The animal lies in a state of stupe- 
faction, and is convulsed when 
touched. 

3. 57. Animal was dead. * 



EXPERIMENT 22. 

li. M. 

The heart of a frog beating 58. 
6. 12. Ten drops of a solution containing 
one grain of opium, were thrown 
into the stomach. 
14. The heart beats not more than 54. 

6. 17. Heart btats 52, but the animal does 

not appear to be much en- 
feebled. 
22. Heart beats no more than 36, and 
very feeble. 

7. The heart w^as beating 43, and more 

strong ; the animal active. 
36. "The heart beats 48 ; the animal 
was then put into water, and the 
following day was alive, but with 
the appearance of being weaker 
than usual. 



50 On the Effects of Opium 



EXPERIMENT 2S, 

Hmirs. Miuutei. 

•9. Five drops of the solution containing 

half a grain, were thrown into the 
stomach ; heart beating 59. 

4. Heart beats 54, but the animal did 
not appear to be much affected. 

10. Heart beats 49. 

20. Heart beats 52 5 the animal was 
then set at liberty. 

EXPERIMENT 24. 

Into another frog one-fourth of a grain of 
opium was thrown. Heart beating 60. 

Two minutes after, it beat b9. 

Five minutes after 54 3 after ten minutes, 54 ^ 
after twenty minutes, it beat 55 ; after half an 
hour it beat S7 ; after two* hours it was beat- 
ing 5 

EXPERIMENT 25. 

IntO'the stomach of another frog one-eighth of 
a grain of opium was thrown. Heart beating 5^8. 
After two minutes it beat 58. 



on the Livhig Sijstem. 51 

After five minutes it beat 62. 
After twenty minutes 59. 
After an hour it beat no more than 50. 
After an hour and half, it beat 55. Tlie 
animal wa$/set at Jibertv. 



EXPERIMENT 26. 
in^h spirits of Wine. 

Ilouri. Wlnutc*. 

11. 3 8. Thirty drops were injected into the 
stomach of a frog. 
Heart beating 60. 
20. The heart more feeble : It cannot 
be numbered to 40. 
WJ 25. Heart beating feebly 25. 

28. The animal extremely, feeble ;• aipl 
pears lethargic. Heart has ceased 
to move. 
The animal continued in this state 
four or five hours. The extremities 
had, in a great measure, 16st their 
contractility. 
6. — The animal was dead : on baring 
the muscles they could not be ex- 
cited to contract. 
G 2 



52 On the Effects of Opium 



EXPERIMENT 27. 

Into the stomach of another frog, two drops 
diluted with ten of water, were thrown. 

Hours. Minutes. 

5. — Heart beating 58. 

5. Heart beat 66, 

10. Heart beat 50, but the animal did 
not appear to be enfeebled. 

20. Heart beating 50, no further ob- 
servations were made upon it. 



EXPERIMENT 28. 

Into another- — One drop of spirits of wine 
was thrown, with ten drops of water : but it 
could not be observed, if any alteration was 
made by it upon the heart of the animal. 

EXPERIMENT 29. 

Wilh yEiher. 
The heart of a frog beating 57. 

H. M. 

10. — Thirty drops of a:ther were thrown 
into the stomach. 

2. Heart beat 50. 

5. Heart beat 46, and the animal ap- 
peared weaker. 



oji the Living System. 53 

Iloun. Minutet. 

10. The hearrt could not be counted. 
The animal was dead at 
1. 20. The muscles were then bared and 
stimulated, but no contraction 
could be excited. 



EXPERIMENT 30. 

Into the stomach of another frog, two drops^' 
sether mixed with ten of water were thrown. 



H. 


M. 




11. 





Heart beating 60. 




5. 


Heartbeat 58. 




20. 


Heart beat 57. 




30. 


Heart beat 52, and feeble. 




35. 


Heart beat 49. 


12. 


— 


Heart was beating 56 ; no other ob- 
servation was made upon it. 



These experiments furnish no other conclu- 
sion except that opium, sether and spirits of 
wine, when thrown into the stomach of frogs, 
in such quantity as to produce any considerable 
change in the animal, all of them equally di- 
minish the velocity of the pulse. The effect 
appeared to be analagous to the experiments 
made with the same animal in :jection 1st. 
and are equally as inconclusive. 

Recourse was then had to other animals. 



54- On the Effects of Opium 

EXPERIMENT 31. 

With Rabbits. 

The heart of a full grown rabbit beats ge- 
nerally from 260 to 270 in a minute, (b) 

Hours. Minutes. 

3. 9. An omice of spirits of wine was in- 
jected down the oesophagus. 

12. Pulse 288, but not considerably 
stronger. 

16. Animal is very dizzy, and staggers 
when he attempts to w^alk. 

20. Pulse encreased to 312 : animal ap-. 
pears completely drunk. 

30. Animal lethargic, with its eyes 
open. 

(b) The velocity of the pulse of a rabbit has not iin- 
freqiiently excited some degree of surprize, and it has 
been suggested that at so high a point ot number, the feel 
could not be so accurate as to discjiminate the exact num- 
ber of pulsations. At the time these experiments were 
made, by frequent application I was persuaded, that in 
the counting, I was not wrong more thali so few in number 
as not to make any difference in the general conclusion, 
which was all that was aimed at ; but that I might avoid 
error as much *? possible, I requested Dr Goodwin, whose 
accuracy is unquestionable, to mark the pulse in all these 
substances, whilst I noted down from time to time his 
report. 



j^7i the Living System, 



•j^ 



Houri. Mioute*. 

45. Animal somnulent. 
80. Pulse has fallen to 264, but con- 
tinues yet strong. 
5. 30. Animal ii> a state of great insensi- 
bility. Itseyqs are yet contractile, 
when irritated moves its feet now 
and then, and is affected with con- 
vulsive tremors : Pulse . quick, 
but remarkably feeble. 
.j6, SO. The eyes have )ost m>ich of their 
contractility, and are beginning 
to be watry. 
i>. Until this period, the animal con- 
tinued to lie in a state of great 
insensibility, without any parti- 
cular change. The heart so feeble 
as not to be numbered. 
30. No sign of life appears except a little 
feeble respiratory motion in the 
thorax. 
11. 10. The motion in the thorax has en- 
tirely ceased. 
N. B. The animal was dead after eleven 
hours and nine minutes. 

EXPERIMENT 32. 

The experiment was repeated with a young 
rabbit \ the heart beat 264 in a minute. 



56 On the Effects of Opiuvi 

Hours. Minutes. 

3. 30. An ounce of spirits of wine was 
thrown into the stomach. 

34, The pulsations of the heart have 
encreased to 308 in a minute. The ^ 
animal appears drunk, and can 
scarcely support itself. 

45. Animal in a state of somnolency, 

50. ^ the pulse so feeble as not to be 
numbered. 
5. 30. No perceptible material change in 
the animal before this period: 
The pupils of the eyes now have 
lost their contractility, and an 
effusion of water appears on the 
surface of the cornea : The motion 
of the thorax so feeble as to leave it 
doubtful ifrespiration was going on. 

40. The animal's respiration has ceased; 

44. The voluntary muscles were ex- 
amined, but no appearance of 
contractility was evidenced upon 
stimulating them. When the 
thorax was opened, the heart 
possessed a very feeble motion j 
but not so great as to merit the 
name of a contraction : It ceased 
to move in four minutes after 
being exposed. 



on the Living Sj/s(cm^\ ,57 

. N. B, This animal, which was young, 
lived only two hours and fourteen minutes, 
after the spirit of wine was thrown iQto the 
stomach. 



EXPERIMENT 35, 

With jEiher, 

if ourt* Minutei* 

1. 21. An ounce of aether was injected 
down the oesophagus of a middle- 
sized rabbit : heart 272. 
22. Within a single mipute the abdo- 
men was very tumid, and dis- 
tended apparently with air. The 
heart is already more slow and 
feeble. 

1. 25. The abdomen continues to swpll; 
the animal prostrate and unable 
to move. 
27. Animal cries, and appears in great 
pain. . Heart more feeble, and 
cannot now be numbered. The 
animal has entirely lost the use of 
its limbs. 

,. 35, Thp animal dead. 

', ill I . I . , 

The abdomen was opened: The stomach 
and intestinesappeared distended to an an^azing 

H 



58 , On the Ejects of Opium 

size; they were punctured, and as the ah' 

escaped, a lighted candle was applied and k 

caus^ht fire. 

There w^as no contractility in any of the vo-. 

luntary muscles : when the heart was exposed 

the ventricles were without motion : but the 

auricles exhibited a feeble pulsation. 



EXPERIMENT 34. 

Wlfh Spiritus Volatilis- Aroinaticiis . 

An ounce was injected into the stomach of 
a full grown, and the same into the stomach 
of a young rabbit. 

The pulse of the eldest when the injection 
was made, beat 260 in a minute. 

After three minutes it beat 312, and with 
proportional encrease of strength. 

After nine minutes, it beat no more than 
276 : but considerably stronger than before 
the injection -.—The animal \v^as now unable to 
Stand. 

After nineteen minutes, the pulse was so 
feeble as not to be numbered : — The animal 
lived 14 hours and 23 minutes after the in- 
jection. 

The pulse of the younger animal, when X\\c 

fluid was thrown into the stomach, was 274 in 
a minute. !JS^[rrjqqf^^^^i:r^3i^i hm 



on the Living Si/stem. 59 

Ahtx two minutes the pulse rose 286 and 
was stronger ; after six minutes, it had fallen 
below its natural standard and was become 
very feeble. 

This animal lived only two hours and 14 
minutes : on examination after death, no con- 
tractility was evident in any of thfe voluntary 
muscles. The thorax was opened ; the left 
side of the heart was motionless, but a slight 
quivering was evident in the right side. 



EXPERIMENT 35. 
With Opium. 

'>Tu«rs. Minutes. 

1. 14. Half art ounce of the solution was 

thrown down the oesophagus of a 
full grown rabbit, the heart beat- 
ing 270 in a minute. 
49. The heart beats with great force 
and velocity, 310 in a minute. 

2. — Heart beats about 300 in a mi- 

nute. 
30. Heart has become more feeble ; 
beats no more than 210 in a 
minute. 

H 2 



60 On the Effects of Opiictn 

Hours. Minutes. 

3. 5. Pulsations considerably more feeble ; 

not more than 1 80 in a minute. 
50. Animal not able to support itself;, 
appears to be asleep; affected 
with universal tremors. 

4. — Pulse so feeble as not to be num- 

bered. 
.5. 20. Animal in a state of insensibility,; 
not capable to be excited to> 
motion, on the application of 
violent mechanical stimulus. 
6. SS, No pulsation to be distinguished; 
the animal yet respires, but in a 
slow and laborious manner. 
10. The animal little altered from the 
last report ; the eyes are watry. 
The animal died during the night,, 
and no opportunity was allowed 
to examine it after death. 

EXPERIMENT 36. 

; Mepeated with a Young Rabbit. 



H. 



17. The. same quantity thrown into the 
stomach of a young animal ; heart 
beating 264 in a minute. 

20. Pulse remarkably strong ; encreased 
in a velocity to 288 in a minute. 



on the Livmg System. 6 1 

H*Qri. Mioute*. 

30. Pulse has fidUen to 26 Ay but still con- 
tinuing stroiig. j 
?K). Animal in a state of ebriety ; has 
lost all command over the vokia- 
tary motions : pulse 250. 
37. Animal begins.; to be convulsed: 
the pulse now so feeble as not to 
benumbered, v^^ith regularity. 
3^, Convulsions which had remitted for 
about half a minute, now re- 
turned again. 
lo. Animal died convulsed. 
On examination after death, none pf the 
muscles subservient to voluntary motion pos- 
sfessed any contractility. 

! When the thorax was opened, the right si^e 
of the heart exhibited a very feeble motion. 



EXPERIMENT 37. 

The same was repeated upon a young and 
old dog, with an ounce of the solution of 
opium. 

The young dog died eight and forty hours 
before the older animal. 

In these last experiments, a very striking 

analogy subsists between the effects of opium 
and those of powerful stimuli, with which it 



62 On the Effects of Opium 

was compared -, the principal points in which 
they agree are the following : 

1st. An encreased action of the heart and 
arteries, succeeding the introduction of the 
several substances into the stomach of rabbits. 

2d. This encreased action being evident 
more early in young than in the full grown 
animals. 

3d. The succeeding diminution occurring 
sooner in the young, than in the adult 
animals. 

4th. The more speedy death of the young, 
than the full grown animals, from equal quan- 
tities of the several substances taken in. 

5th. The entire destruction of contractility 
in all the voluntry muscles and a diminution of 
it, almost amounting to exhaustion in the heart 
after death, from the action of the several 
substances introduced into the stomach. 

These experiments, wliich may be con- 
cluded as positive facts, not only serve to elu- 
cidate the question, but have a more wide in- 
fluence ; they lead to an explanation of the 
defect of appearance of encreased action, 
when the same substances were applied to the 
hearts, and injected into the stomach of frogs. 

Before any attention is paid to such expla- 
nation, we shall continue the analogy some- 
what further, and notice the most striking of 



on the Living System. 63 

the experiments, which have been brought 
forwards in support of the opinion,— that 
opium was sedative. ITie opinion of the cele- 
brated Whytt, was at all times weighty, and 
he strengthened his arguments in favour of the 
sedative influence of opium, by a remarkable 
quotation drawn from the thesis of Dr. Bard, 
De Opio. Not being able to procure that 
Dissertation, we shall quote the passage from 
Dr. Whytt, as he gives it. 

" At seven A.M. Dr. Bard took one grain 
** and a half of opium, his pulse beating 71 in 
** a minute. At 8 A. M. his pulse beat 69 ; 
" at 8|, pulse beat 67 ; at 8r, pulse beat 66 ; 
" at 8|^, 66 ; at 9, 64 ; at 9]- after breakfast, 
" it beat 66 ; at 10, 65 ; at 1 1, it beat 61 ; at 
" 11^, it beat 60; at Hf, 59; at 12, 57; and 
*' this was the lowest to which his pulse ever 
?' fell. 

Dr. Whytt insists very strongly upon this 
experiment ; yet, that it is defective in point of 
proving any thing in favour of his opinion, is 
very evident by a little attention to it. Dr. 
Bard took the opium at seven in the morning ; 
he measured his pulse for the first time at eight, 
he then concluded that the state of his pulse at 
that hour was to be attributed to the primary 
effect of opium upon the body. To point out 



64 0?i the Efftcts of Opium 

the insufficiency of this experiment, it is only 
necessary to advert to experiment 36. 

Had the pulse, in that experiment, been 
omitted to be examined for the space of eighteen 
minutes, and a conclusion drawn from the 
effects which were at that period observed, it 
would have been a conclusion favourable to 
the opinion which Dr. Whytt maintained : But 
that conclusion would not have been agreeable 
to what was fact ; for, the pulse, previous to 
that period, had arisen more than 20 beats in a 
minute. It would have been tb substitute for 
the primary effect of opium, that effect which 
took place when its primary action had begun 
iq diminish, and to have mistaken a condition 
w^hich that action had left behind, for the 
action itself. To put this point, however, out 
of doubt, it was necessary to repeat the ex- 
periment, and with that degree of observation 
which Dr. Bard appears to have neglected, 
and to prosecute likewise at the same time, 
the analogy with jether and the other sub- 
stances. 



9n tlie Living System. 65 

EXPERIMENT 38. 

(cj On the lliiman Pulse, 

Rouiu. Miaures. 

9. — Upon an empty stomach before 
breakfast, Mr. Fleming took 
half an ounce of spirits of wine 
diluted with a little water. Pulse 
78. 

10. No alteration in the pulse : a sense 
of warmth at the stomach. 

20. Pulse 82, and considerably more 
full : an evident exhilaration of 
spirits. 
9. 35. Pulse 82, and continuing equally 
full. 

48. Half an ounce more was given 
him: Pulse 80. 
19, — No further encrease in his pulse, 
' which still remains 80. 

35. Pulse has now fallen to 70, but yet 
feels more full than at the first, a 
little sense of heaviness in the 
head : a slight sensation of heat 
in the stomach. 

(c) In these experiments likewise, 1 was indebted to 
the friendly assisJance of Dr. Goodwin, who made the 
report in Exp. 33, 39, 40, 41 and 42. 

I 



66 On the Effects of Opium 

These soon disappeared and left no dis- 
agreeable consequences behind. 



EXPERIMENT 39. 

Mr. Gerard, at the same-time, took upon an 
empty stomach two drams of vitriolic aether. 

Hours. Minutes. 

9. — Pulse 64, and feeble. 

5. Pulse 68^ and considerably more 
full. 

15. Pulse 72, very strong; agreeable 
sensation of pleasure. Warmth 
at the stomach. 

45. Pulse has diminished to 68. — He 
took two drams more. 

59. Pulse not more than 68, but yet 
full and hard; a little head-ach, 
^ sense of heat and nausea at the 
stomach : notwithstanding this, 
he experiences a degree of ex- 
hilaration. 

10. 25. Pulse 66, but na sensation of un 

easiness. 
45. Pulse 66 ; some degree of nausea. 
55. Pulse 62. The nausea gone ofF^ 

no uneasy sensation. 



vn the Living System. 67 

EXPERIMENT 40. 

9. 10. Upon an empty stomach before 
breakfast, pulse 72, and feeble, 
another gentleman took half an 
ounce of spiritus volatilis aroma- 
ticus. 

20. Little alteration has been perceived 
in the pulse. 

25. He took five drams more of the 
spirit. 

35. Pulse 72, more fall and hard. Ex- 
hilaration. 

50. Pulse not altered : a slight sensation 
of heaviness at the stomach. 

10. iO.* Pulse e(^, but yet full. 

35. Pulse 66, but now becoming feeble. 
10. Pulse 66 ; two grains of opium 

dissolved in a little water were 

now swallowed. 
50. Pulse 68, and very full -, greater 

degree of exhilaration. 
57. Slight nausea with vertigo ^ pulse 

68, and less full. 

11. 5. Pulse 66, and very weak; general 

languor, with violent pain at the 

stomach. 

10. Pulse y^t very weak : ITie severity 

of the pain encreases: It was a 
I 2 



68 On the Effects of Opium. 

Hours. Minute*. 

little relieved by large draughts 
af lukewarm milk and water, but 
continued notwithstanding very 
severe, for more than three hours. 



EXPERIMENT 41. 

H. M. 

8. 54. Mr. Mackenna, upon an empty 

stomach, took two grains of 
opium dissolved in a little water. 
Pulse 78. 

9. — Pulse 80, and considerably more 

full. 
22. Pulse 82, and continuing still full. 

A sense of heaviness and stupor 

in the head. 
32. Pulse continues at 82, but rather 

more feeble. 
54. Pulse fallen to 78, and diminished in 

strength. Sense of languor : Face 

flushed. 
10. 5. Pulse sunk to 74, but yet somewhat 

full. Two grains more of opium 

were taken. 
20. Pulse remains at 74 : sense ef lan- 
guor abated ; a little confusion of 

mind approaching to intoxication. 



on the Llvitig System. 6f 

Noori. Minutes. 

30. Pulse not more than 68, yet consi- 
derably full : Face flushed ; red- 
ness of the tunica adnata. Evident 
signs of intoxication. 
55. Pulse 64 and beginning to be feeble: 
a degree of heaviness in the 
head. 
11. — Pulse 64, more feeble. Slight vertigo : 
flushing of the face and redness 
of the eyes abated. 
55. Vertigo remaining ; an hour after, 
considerable sickness at the sto- 
mach came on. In the course of 
the day, it repeatedly returned, 
though relieved occasionally with 
spirits and water. 

EXPERIMENT 42. 

K. M. 

10. 1. A gentleman took three grains of 
opium, upon an empty stomach, 
whilst lying in bed, pulse beat at 
this time 56 in a minute, and 
weak. 

4. Pulse 58 and more strong. 

6. Pulse 60 and encreased in strength. 

8. Pulse 64. 

13. Pulse 66'^ an additional grain was 
at that period taken. 



70 On the Effects of Opium 

Hours. Minutes. 

15. Pulse 68; encreased in strength. 
Sensation of heat in the forehead 
and eyes. 

20. Pulse 64 : breathing a little labo- 
rious, with a little confusion in 
the head, and drowsiness. 

25. Pulse continues at 64. 

30. Pulse 64. 
10. 40. Pulse 60, great tendency to sleep. 

45. Pulse 60. 

50. Pulse 60 : respiration slow and 
somewhat laborious. 

55. Pulse 59 : gentle respiration. In- 
tense thirst for the last ten mi- 
nutes, 
il 5. Pulse 60: heat of the body en- 
creased ; violent perspiration in 
every part except the face. 

10. Pulse 59 : great tendency to sleep : 
eyes painful and bloodshot. Per^ 
spiration continues abundant. 
Pulse 59. 

1 5. Pulse b6^ and very feeble. 

20. Pulse not more than 54 and feeble. 
After this he arose, was seized with 
nausea, which continued the 
greatest part of the day. 



OH the Living System. 71 



EXPERIMENT 43. 

Dr. Clark offered himself as the subject for 
another experiment. 

Hours. Miiiutct. ^ 

12. 49. His pulse beat 64 before breakfast : 
he took two grains of opium dis- 
solved in water. 
12. 51. Pi^se remains at 64. 

55. Pulse 72, and encreased in strength. 

1. — Pulse 72 ; a little confusion in the 

head. 

5. Pulse 74. 

• 9, Pulse continues 74, strong and full. 

1 1 . Two grains more were taken. Sense 

' of pain m the head. 
15. Pulse 75 to 76 : drowsiness. 
20. Pulse *77: drowsiness and stupor. 
25. 74, somewhat more weak: respi- 
ration short and laborious. 
30. Pulse 76 ; inclination to sleep. 
35. Pulse 76, but not so strong as a 

quarter of an hour ago. 
40. Pulse 7 3 ; he is- now soundly asleep : 

Heat of the skin encreased. 
45. Pulse 73, and becoming weaker. 
50. Pulse 73 ; sleeps sound : breathes 
easy. 



On the Effects of Opium 



Hour*. Mimites. 




56. 


Pulse 69 ; skin hot and dry. 


2. — 


Pulse 66 ; much weaker. 


5. 


Pulse 67. 


10. 


Pulse 67. 


15. 


Pulse 63, and weak. 


20. 


Pulse 62, weak and feeble. 


25. 


Pulse 62. 


30. 


Pulse still 62 : He did not fall lowef 




than this, although repeatedly 




measiared after this period. 



EXPERIMENT 4k 

Pi*. Clark subjected himself a second time. 

H. M. 

12. 5. Pulse 63: He took one grain of 
opium upon an empty stomach. 

10. Pulse not much altered. 

15. Pulse 70, and encrcased in strength. 

25. Pulse 76, and considerably more 
strong. 

30. Pulse 76; pain of the head. Another 
grain was taken. 

§5. Pulse 75. 

'K). Pulse 76. 

45. Pulse 78 ; giddiness and cQpfusion. 

50. Pulse 76. 

^o. Pulses 76. 

3 



on the Living St/siem, H 



nottrt. Mlnutel 




1. — 


Pulse lo ; another grain was given* 


5. 


Pulse 75. 


10. 


Pulse 75. 


15. 


Pulse still 75. 


20. 


Pulse 72. 


25. 


Pulse 72: Confusion, ftnd a little 




giddiness. 


30. 


Pulse 72, and somewhat weaker. — 




A fourth grain was taken. 


33. 


Pulse 72. -^^ 


40. 


Pulse 72 : a degree of somnolency^ 


45. 


l\ilse 73. 


50. 


Pulse 74. 


2. — 


Pulse 72, and becoming more 




feeble. 


io. 


Pulse 69, and evidently more weak. 




Steeps. 


QO. 


Pulse 68. 


30. 


Piilse e^y very feebk. 


40. 


Pulse 58, and very irregular j beats 



sometimes not more than three 
times in five seconds, and some- 
times it beat e'tght in Rvq secondis. 

45. Waked affrighted: This agitation 
quickened the p\ihe ; it beat at 

47. 6k 

50. Beat 62 ; no further observation w^ 
made upon it.- 

K 



74 Ofi^^^^flsof Opium 

In these experiments, , in Which the several 
substanGjCs ,\^: ere taken into th^ human sto- 
mach, a perfect analogy on the following- 
points is established. 

1st. It is concluded, that ^n cncreased 
action of the heart and arteries and energy of 
the brain resulted from the action of opium, 
aether, spirits of wine, and spiritus volatilis aro- 
maticus taken, into the stomach. Vide 'Exp. 
38, 39,. 40 & 41. 

2d. That in the course of ari hour or there- 
abouts, after the ,a>dminisjtration of the above 
several substances, the actions which tliey had 
induced were diminished, and a state ofdebiHty 
succeede4>r, : .yide lUisupiYi, 

3d. That an equal quantity ;of the same sub- 
stance^ ^hich;lia4 once excited action in the 
system, w^as inadequate on a second exhibition 
to raise the action of the system to the same 
point again. XX^q Ut supiHh & 43, 44. 
.;. The. reiTiarksr which were made upon Dr. 
Bard's experiment, are, in consequence of the 
phoenomeaa ,p;resented by the last experiment 
upon the hunian pulse, shewn to have been 
Vjcry just,. fjS):r it is. there evident that the pulse 
in the spa]ce of one hpur from the,^exhibition of 
opium, had sunk down either to the natural 
standard or below, after having; been enci^^feased 
more than ten pulsation? in a minute. At this 



on ihe^^Lhnnsi ^vsttin: Of 

period ray oHseK'ii1fiotw''c6rr(fsf)on'(i' \Vith fhosd 
of Dr. iBard's, 'blit lead to a i?te'cortclai 

slob';'^for*'ifiSeVidcrtt, tliat he bnly'nbticed 
the state 6f the pulse' which was presented aftcff 
the cessation of thc'prrmriry effect of opiums 
and not the condition \\hi( h' t'visUd rltrrlnf^ 
the action. 

I am no w enabled to account for the defect of 
aj^jkarance of enc^eased action 'uj)cin the appli^ 
catibn of opium to the hearts and stonlachs of 
frogs. In all bodies endued wkh life, a certain 
property is present by which ^hey are enabled 
to receive the in'ipression of pMvers applied. ^ 

The Effect which results from the appli- 
cation of powers so applied t6 this property '% 
called action : confined to the' iiiuscular fibre^ 
this property has been denominated irritabi- 
lity: in the nerves it is called sensibility. The 
late ingenious and philosophic Brown, dis- 
tinguished this property by the teitn excitabi- 
lity, expressing a general principle in the body 
of receiving impressions, but without referring 
it either to the nerves or muscular fibre in 
particular. 

As this term appears to be very' compre- 
hensive, we shall crave the liberty to employ 
It In this place. Supposing then, all powers 
applied, act upon this property, it is proved by 
Experiments 38, 39, 40 & -tl, that in conse- 
K 2 



76 On the Effects qf Qpiiun 

queiKe of the action produced, thjs property 
becomes diminished, so that to produce an 
equal effect a second time, the power acting is 
required to be applied in ji greater degree} 
but it Is also proved by Experipients 16, 17, 
18, & 19, that the same power, which in adir- 
minished quantity, produces action and exr 
hausts a portion of this property, when applied 
in a large quantity, altogether exhausts this 
property, without producing ^py apparent 
encrease of action, so th^t the application qf 
no powers can again excite action ; and it is 
also proved by Experiments 31, 32, 33, 34, & 
36, that the more abundant this property isi, the 
rnore speedy is the action which results from 
the application of the powers, and naore speedy 
is the cessation of th^t action 3 now admitting 
this, it will follow, that the power applied 
may be so intense, and the excitability so abun- 
dant, that the actioil produced may not con- 
tinue for the ^qratipn of a minute ; s\^pposing 
further these ^^a o, viz. the power acting and. 
^he property apte4 upon, to be in a still greater 
disproportion to each other, the action which 
ensues m^y be instantaneous, or even so quick 
as to ?\ud^ q^r perceptiop^. Thus a slight^ 
s^oc^ .of; ele^^ri^ity, opcasions m^scuter ^onx 
tr^Gtijons, and, diminishes the excitability of th^ 
part w^^re, ^he action took pl^ce: ftujt.^ 



ifn tti£ Liviag ^i^&Uiru 77 

sliQck may be given so strong, sfe.Ui^iR^C'bauRttlie 
excitability in, (oto, without U}e least degrcef/jf 
action b«lpg.<9yidejnced. Th^ diminution ;ol 
action, nntl the exbauition of? >tiiii property, 
which were evident upon the application of 
opium to the heartj} of frogs, vide Ej(p, 
1st, 2d & 3d, furniA therefore no argumeut 
in favour of its sedative efFectj ;;for it |s <jlcap 
that the same condition U abo the cops^u^jjc© 
of the application of powerful stimuli,, ;t^ido 
Exp. 10th, 11th, 12th & 13th, and is to be 
explained in the above manner. The con-^ 
dition in which the muscular fibre is left in 
these instances, so far therefore from weaken- 
ing the facts alledged in favour of the stimulant 
action of opium, is rendered a very powerful 
proof in support of it. But it must not bo 
omitted here, to give proper weight to the 
expQrin>er>t in which the aqtion of the heart 
€^ the frog was encreased upon the application 
of a very small quantity of opium, as thq 
above explanation makes it appear in a stron gei? 
light. For if a powerful stimulus exhausts ex- 
citabiUty without prodnCii^ visible encreaseof 
action, in con$equei>ce of, i|s stimulant effecti 
^nd if the operation of ^pium is to be attri- 
buted to the same cause, this stimulus applied 
in a diminished dose, a^nd in, a proj>ortion 
suitable iq thi^ ex;citability of the partjt must 



73" On the Effects of Opium 

of course, produce evident action : and this 
did appear to be the effect of opium in the ex- 
periment above quoted, viz. Exp. 4th. 
' These deductions being admitted, in order 
to have a correct idea of the effect of a stimu- 
lant operation, we should deifine a stimulus to 
be " a power which encreases the action of 
" the heart and arteries, the energy of the 
" brain, and diminishes or exhausts the ex- 
*< Citability of the system." 



CHAP. II. 

?iOV;>* ; 

OUR attention is next called to examine 
what is the effect of powers termed sedative, 
when applied to the animal body ; for by this 
term is understood the operation of a power 
presenting phcenomena directly the reverse 
of those exhibited under the operation of sti- 
rnulants. The condition induced by these 
means we shall compare with the effects re- 
sulting from the exhibition of opium, in order 
that the analogy we have attempted to estia- 
blish, may be rendered more complete by the 
aid of contrast. 

'-•Amongst the various sedative powers enu- 
merated by authors, there is none concerning 
o. 



on the Living Sijstem.^ ff^ 

which there has been less difference of opi- 
nion, than respecting the effect of coH. This 
power, although considered by some as sti- 
mulant when applied to the animal body at a 
degree somewhat inferior to its own tem- 
perature, has, however, been esteemed sedative 
by all, when applied in an'intense degree. It 
is in this degree that we ^all examine its 
effects. 



EXPERIMENT 45. 

A middle-aged rabbit, whose pulse beat 252 
in a minute was put into a tin vessel placed 
in a Frigorific mixture. 

Houn. Mhiutcj. Ther.* 

11. — 0. Animal Struggles to escape. 

10. Animars pulse less distinct, 

but beats 264 in a minute. 

20. 10. Pulse much weaker, but yet 
264 in a minute. The ther- 
mometer rose considerably 
when * the., anirtifel was ftcst 
put.i|i£but the temperature 
, could not be takeq, on ac- 
count bf the struggles of the 



f^ On the Effects of Opium 



Muiutes. Ther. 

f^O. Pulse is now more slow and 

more feeble, not more than 
240. Animal trembles very 
much and is less active. 

40. 10. Pulse not more than 216. 
^l^ — Pulse very feeble, only 192. 

30. 12. Pulse considerably more fee- 
ble ; can scarce be counted, 
yet not more than 1 80. Ani- 
mal trembles and breathes 
very laboriously. In this 
state the animal was left 
until morning : the fri^o- 
rific mixture had dissolved 
during the night, and the 
thermometer bad rose to 
50. The pulse of the ani- 
mal was feeble, but beat 
240 .in a minute. 

EXPERIMENT 46. 

A full-grown frog, whose heart beat 62 in 
a minute at 

ir» M. 

iQ^i — Was put into a tin vessel of the 
•.: temperature of 8". 

2. Frog removed. Heart much more 
feeble; beats only 26 in a minute. 
Animal put in again. 



xm the Living Sj/s(em. 91 

HMfs. Miniitn. 

6. Ammal removed: his heart so feeble 
as not to be distinguished to beat 
tlrrough the integuments. 
11. — It was put into the cold again. 

11. Animal removed: the skin under 
the belly and the thigh was be- 
ginning to freeze, and it had no 
power of motion. The thorax 
was opened, the heart presented 
itself, beating feebly only six 
times in a minute; after being 
exposed to the air for a few 
\ minutes, the animal recovered a 

slight degree of motion, and the 
heart encreased to eighteen pulsa- 
tions in a minute. The animal 
was dead about an hour after. 
From these experiments, I am enabled to 
draw the following conclusions. 

1st. That cold diminishes the actions of the 
body. 

2d. That this effect is shewn by the di- 
minished temperature and diminished action of 
the heart. 

It is deserving to be remarked, that when 
the rabbit was put into the cold, its pulse was 
accelerated, but rendered more feeble; buc 



8g On the' jFlffects-yof Opium 

that after it had been exposed some time to the 
cold, it became both slow and fy.eble. 

As we found that the effects; of stimulants 
were gr.eater upon young- than adult animals, 
proven by conclusions page 62. 

We proceeded to examine the effect of the 
sedative of cold upon animals of different 



ages. 



SECTION II. 

What are the Effects of Cold upon young and 
adult Animals f^ '' 

How>; . Winutpfc -o VJ a) [)9EG'?1:>(7':? JIC^ 'i Temp, 

^^riH? i^ii^^^'^^^t P^ ^?^^ tin ves- 

sfel, temperiitufe- r:v/^ 15". 

heart beatinga64inaminute. . . 
— 30. Heart .beats 276 in; a ininute, ^-^ 

makes great struggles to ; j 
escape... .,:.., ^^j- ..,-- 17. 
1 — Animal ;breathes laboriously, . 

Pulse 252 : A fresh mixture ] 7.^ 
of snow and salt was^put into 
the outer vessel. 
^Q,^,^J?ulseYpy feeble, and slow 5 

cannot be numbered. 5 



'oh "(he Living Si/stein, 83 

Hou.i. Minutes. Tesip* 

30. Animal breathes very labo- 
riously: . The thermometer 
placed between its thighs, 
rose to 84. 4\ 

'2. — Animal coils itself into a round 
form ; appears! very^ uneasy, 
frequently licks its feet. 2. 

30. One of the fore feet rigid at 
the extremities ; the pulse 
very slow and feeble. 2. 

3. — The other foot rigid. The ex- 

tremities of both ears rl«:id : 
the heart can now scarce be 
distinguished to beat through 
the thorax, m-:': i ' : o. 

30. All the. feet rigid : the animal 
scarce able to, support itself. 

4. — Animal is dead.- 'It- was re- 

move;d'.j'j"i v o.;, 
The thorax was opened, the heart con- 
tracted feebly, not more than 29 times in a 
minute. The heart was opened and a ther- 
mometer introduced, it rose only to 58. 



L 2 



S'^ On the Effects of Opimn 



EXPERIMENT (b.) 

Hours. Minutes. Temp. 

12. 20. Young rabbit put into a tin 
vessel, heart beating 252 in a 
minute. Violent struggles. 16°. 
50. Animal very uneasy and cries 
frequently; pulse 276, and 
feeble. 18. 

Fresh supply of snow and salt 
put in 
1. 20. Animal coils itself into a round 
form. Temperature when 
the thermometer is put be- 
twixt the thighs 86 ; in the 
vessel, 4. 

Pulse not more than 252, 
and more feeble. 
50. Thermometer betwixt the. 
thighs 80. Pulse so weak as 
not to be counted to more 
than 240. 
7, 20. Animal breathes laboriously, 
but makes yet occasional 
struggles to escape. 0. 

50. Both the fore feet beginning to 

be rigid. 0. 



Hour*. 


Minuttt. 


3. 


20. 




50. 


4. 


20. 



en the Living System, %^ 

Tenp. 

Animal moves about the ves- 
sel; pulse very weak, but 
cannot be counted. C. 

Animal's ears rigid. 
Animal without motion, yet 
breathes very distinct. Ther- 
mometer betwixt the thighs 
and the body, 76. 0. 

5. — Animal still breathes, but ap- 
pears almost dead : Ther- 
mometer in the pelvis 45. 
40. The animal is dead. The 
thorax was opened j the 
heart moved feebly not more 
than 25 in a minute. Ther- 
mometer introduced into the 
hearty rose to 52. 
In this experiment it is evident, that a young 
animal can support an intense degree of cold 
for a longer time than a full grown animal ; 
also, that the actions of the system can go on 
under a much inferior tem{x;rature. This 
experiment confirms some of those made by 
the order of the Royal Medical Society of 
Edinburgh, 1785, with the view of ascertain- 
ing some cfTectB of cold. 



86 On ike Effiects of Opium 



EXPERIMENT (c.) 

An experiment directly apposite to tliat just 
related, we talce'^'the liberty td-quote. 

" A full grown rabbit, the Bairs of the skin 
occasionally wetted, died after two hours and 
forty-one minutes, when exposed to a degree 
of cold which varied from 15 to 10°.'* ~ 

" The blood let out from the heart of 
another adult animal killed by cold, raised the 
thermometer to 58^" 

" A young rabbit compared with the first 
and w^et in like manner, sustained life more 
than five hours, in a degree 't>f cold, which 
varied from 15 to 2^"." 

" The blood of another young rabbit killed 
by cold, when the heart was punctured, raised 
the theraiometer,'only to 48^** 

From these last related experiments it ap- 
pears probable, that the action of the heart of 
a young animal >\'hose excitability is more 
abundant than that of an adult animal, can go 
on for some time in a temperature which will 
even destroy the life of an adult animal. 

We next proceeded to examine the efiPects 
of cold upon animals whose excitability is 
more abundant, than in young rabbits. 



^i^-^JJvji^ S0ein: $'7 



EXPERIMENT 47. 

Four full grown frbgs^ were: placed in a tin 
vessel at the temperature of 8.flegrces : >vJben 
the animals were introduced, tke^ thermometer 
rose to 19; the frogs, made rery violent strug^ 
gles and appeared very.; linelasyL / After eight 
minutes they were without motion :. thermos 
meter at 7 degrees: after ten minutes the:$kin 
of the belly of each w^s rigid, land after 1^ 
mhiutes all the under part of the body andr^tiaef 
extremities were frozen. -jn r s •' ' > /^. rf 

The skianposii Jthe back iof the .bodies.. wasf 
jBeC^oftwjjjl^ej^ iw©re. reitiQYediaftejrr sixteen 
minutes. 

One animal wns placca in the open air, in 
a temperature of 3iv a ^second was placed, in 
the window of a room where, the temperature 
was more than 60; a third was placed at a 
distance from the fire, where the temperature 
was 80 ; the fourth was placed still nearer, in 
a temperature betwixt 90 and 100. — After 
about the space of three minutes, the two ani- 
mals which were placed in the warmer tempe- 
rature, became soft and exhibited a feeble 
u cation ; they were then removed. The other 
two were not yet able to move. After five 
minutes a feeble motion was observable in the 



»S On the Effects of Opium 

inferior extremities, and after 10 minutes they 
were able to draw them upwards. All the four 
were placed in a temperature of 60 : after an 
hour the two frogs, which had been softened 
in a warm temperature were dead : the other 
two were yet feeble, but were able to draw 
their legs up to the body. After three hours 
the animal which had been exposed to the 
open air was more vigorous than the other. 
Both the frogs were then put into cold water 
at 56 degrees ; they appeared for some time to 
have very little use of the extremities, but were 
buoyed up near the surface ; after about half an 
hour, both the animals had gained sufficient 
strength to swim feebly about the water. One 
was now removed and placed upon a dry 
plate : after twelve hours^ the animal whicli 
was left in the water, was dead, but the other 
animal upon a dry plate was yet feebly alive. 



EXPERIMENT 48. 

Another frog was placed in a temperature of 
O** : the thermometer rose immediately 8 de- 
grees; after ten minutes thermometer at 0^ 
The animal remained five minutes longer; 
when taken out, it was universally rigid ; it 
was placed in the open air, in a temperature of 



m the Living St/stem. 99 

^ I , where it r^coveretf i little feeble motion of 
its hind extremities, but was found dead after 
thi'ee houfs. 



EXPERIMENT 49 

Amongst liic \w> lui^vulous expcinu^ius'of 
Mr. John Hunter, many curious facts are met 
with demonstrating, that animals whose ex- 
citability is great, caA exist in a temperature 
below the freezing point : as they tend to the 
same point as the ab6ve we shall quote some 
of them. 

'' The tem}Derature of a viper is 68 degrees. 
''^ It was placed ih tW temperiature of 10 
'^ degrees : after ten minutes, its temperature 
** was reduced to 37 : after ten minutes more' 
" it was 35 : after 30 minutes, it was at 31. 
" nie temperature did not descend lower ; the 
*' tail was beo:innina: to freeze !** 

'*^ 'File temperature in the stomach of a frog 
" was 44 ; the animal was put into a degred 
" of cold, when the terriperature in the sto 
•* mach fell to 31 ; the animal appeated' 
" almost dead, but recovered soon after being 
" taken out. Beyond this point> the heart 
*' could not be lessenexi' without destroying 
** the animal/' 

M 



90 On the Ejects of Opium 

," The thermometer was 69 in the stomach 
" of an eel. When exposed to a great degree 
" of cold, the thermometer fell to 31: The 
" animal was removed and recovered.'* 

*^ The thermometer was 44 in a snail : In 
" the cold vessel it was reduc|ed to 31: after 
" some time the thermometer rose to 32 ; the 
" animal froze and died.". 

From these we conclude that the more abun- 
dant is the excitability, the greater is the re- 
duction of the temperature v> hich the animal 
can bear rv it /tout having the actions of life' 
destroyed. 

It was observed, conclusion the Sd, page* 
4Tth, that the capacity of an animal's body to 
receive impressions was diminished by the ap- 
plication of stimulants. W^ next proceeded 
to enquire what. would be the etlect of the 
application of a sedative power. 

EXPERIMENT 50. 

A mi-ddJe-si^ed rabbit's pulse beating 252; 
was put into a vessel whose temperature was 
S0\ 

Hours. Minutes. 

8. — Animal appears uneasy from the 
^eoldV 
10. Pulse 264, but diminished in force.' 



On the Living Sjjstein. 91 

IMiiiutcs, Minuter. 

^0. Pul^e 276 ; temperature then raised 
to 35. 

30. Pulse 264, and more feeble. Tem- 
perature 30. 

^n ]^I]se scarce 252 and very feeble. 
The animal was removed : three 
tea-spoonfuls of the spirits of wine 
were thrown down the oesopha- 
gus into the stomach : N. B. The 
oesophagus was opened before the 
animal was put into the cold 
vessel. 

50. The pulse 276, and greatly en- 
creased in strength : the animal 
appeared drunk ; can scarcely 
support itself. 

65. The animal lay prostrate ; appears 
to have lost the use of its limbs ; 
pulse more quick and strong, 
28S. 
<). — Pulse 276, but yet strong and full. 
The animal makes a stertorous 
noise as if he was asleep : no 
motion of the body. 

10. Pulse 276 ; beginning to be more 
feeble. 

20. Animal appears to be in a state of 
insensibility, or rather a profound 

M 2 



92 On the Effects cj Opium 

Hours. •Mintrtei. 

sleep, but the eyes are open and 
have lost their sensibility: pulse 
so feeble that it can scarce be 
numbered ; it may be about 240. 
30. Pulse cannot be numbered. When 
the animal, is struck he makes 
feeble motions in the extrelinties, 

10. — The animal lies in the same state : 
loud stertor ancl laborious respi- 
ration. 

12. -r-r The animal appeared much the 
same. 
In the morning it was found dead, 
being left in the above state at 
bed-time.. 

EXPERIMENT 51. 

At the time w^hen the spirits of wine were 
thrown into the stomach of the last rabbit, the 
same quantity was throwr^ into the stomach of 
another, equal in size ajnd age, but which had 
pot been exposed to cold ; after ten minute^ 
the animal was able to run about ; after fifteen 
minutes its pulse beat 276. The animal was 
then enfeebled and could not support itself: 
after twenty minutes, it was prostrate like the 
other. His pulse beat 288 y after 25 minutes 



on the Living Sj^stem. 93 

pulse beat SOO : after 30, pulse 288 and begin* 
ning to be jnoie fceWe, ;^ $tcr|:orous noise re- 
sembling th4t in the other animal: after 40^ 
pulse 264. The anin)al lay in a seemingly- 
insensible state, the jeye3 were open but h^ 
lost much of their sensibility ; at 1 If pul$e very 
feeble but was counted to 25^. In the morn- 
ing the animal was ^live, had rex^Qvered $q 
much as to be able to run ^bout, but wa? feeblis 
and appeared to labour under great insen3it^-' 
lity: the respiration w^s easy and its pul^e 
beat 240 ; after some hours he eat and p^-^ 
fectly recovered. 

EXPERIMENT 32. 

Four large frogs were pificed in a tempera- 
ture of melting ice, they seemed uneasy in the 
situation, ^nd attempted to escape. After 
being exposed ten minn^e^, one was removed ; 
ten drops of the spirits of wine w^re thrown 
down the qesophagus. Aft^r ten minutes more, 
a second was withdrawn : ten drops more were 
thrown down the opsoph^gu^ : after 30 minutes 
a third was removed, ten drops more \va3 
thrown down into tb^ ^toipach: ^fter forty 
minutes, th^ fourth ; ten drops were likewise 
thrown into the stomach of this : at this time 
^he frog which had first been removed, was 



^4 On the Effects of Opium 

able to move about,' but the second was so 
feeble as not to move. They all diexi except 
the first and in the following succession. The 
last animal removed from the cold died in less 
than two hours ; the animal removed the 
third lived near three hours : the minimal re- 
moved the second lived longer than five 
hours. The animal removed 'the first, after 
one hour was so feeble as to be incapable of 
motion ; after five hours, he had recovered in 
some degree, and was then put into cold water; 
the day following he was weak, biit* at length 
entirely recovered. 

EXPERIMENT 53. 

Ten drops were thrown into the stomach of 
a frog of equal size as the other four, he was 
made weak by it for several hours, but after 12 
hours had elapsed had nearly recovered all his 
former strength. 

From these experiments, I conclude that the 
capacity of receiving the action of stimuli, is 
encreased by the effect produced from the ap- 
plication of the sedative cold. 

The particularization of the effects of this 
sedative power furnishes us with the following 
conclusions. 



on f/ie. Living Si/stem. ^5 

1st. llic sedative effect of cold diminishes 
all the actipns of the body., 

2d. It diminishes the temperature by ex- 
periment. 

3d. It diminishes the action of the heart and 
arteries in the first instance, by rendering them 
quick and feeble ; in the second by rendering 
them slow and feeble. 

4th. That its effects are experienced more 
reacjily by adult than young, animals. Exp. 
a. b. c. Section 2d. The three last , cojiclu^ 
sions proven by thenrt. . 

5th. That animals of an inferior temperature, 
whose excitability is abundant, can subsist 
under lower degrees of this power, than warm- 
blooded animals, or those whose excitability is 
not so abundant. Exp. 47, 48, 49. 

6th. That animals exposed to its effects have 
their capacity to receive the action of stimu- 
lants encreased. Exp. r50* 

From these conclusions, it appears proper to 
express a sedative in the following manner. 

A poiver which diminishes the action of the 
heart and arteries y the energy of the brairiy. 
and encreases the excitability of the system. 

By comparing these conclusions with those 
drawn at page 62, it will be found that the 
^ff(^cts produced by stimulant powers and by 
tbej^edativ.e one of cold, are d^Tjtctly the rqyerse 



'^ Oil the 'Efetts of Opiiim 

of eath oth^r. As by those conclusions if w^ s 
proved that opium produced an effect upon 
the body similar to stitilulants, attd'^^s it isrnow 
proved by conclusions 4th, 5th & eth, p. 9^5/^ 
that the sedative effect of cold e^ibits ap- 
pearnces and induces a condition of the body 
opposite to those which were observed under 
the operation of stimulants, that'as the analogy 
held' good betwixt stimulants and^ opium in 
every instance where' we -subjected theni to 
experiment; and that in those instances, 
where we have compared the effect of sedatives 
as exhibited likewise by experiment, the analogy 
has altogether failed; it is to lie inferred frbm 
thence, that the effect of opium is inversely as 
the effect of sedatives, and directly as the effect 
of stimulants. 

To trace the analogy somewhat further, ft 
appears by experiment 47, 48 & 4^, as has al- 
ready been observed, that frogs and other ani- 
mals whose excitability is abundant, can sustain 
life in a temperature beneath the freezing 
point, and also by experiment a. b. c. section 
2d. — ^That young animals whose excitability is 
more abundant than adult ones, can support 
life under greater degrees of cold than adult 
animals; we further conclude, that the effect of 
sedatives is directly at the excitement, and 
inversely as the excitability: Furthefi a^ it i^ 



on the Living System, ' 97 

proved that frogs are more easily afFccted by 
stimulantii than those aniinals, whose cxcUabi- 
ity is^npt so abundant, ^nd by Experiment 
31, 32, 33 & 34, that young animals are 
sooner affected by stimuli than adult ones : it 
is further to be concluded, that the effect of 
stimulants is directly as the excitability, and 
inversely as the excitement. Also, it ii> proveS^ 
by Experiment 2,J^;2g, 2? %c, Mi that opium 
affects frogs more speedily tlian warm-blooded 
animals ; and by Experiment 35 & 36, young 
animals of warm blood more readily than adult 
animals of warm blood, that the. effect of 
opium likewise is directly as the excitability 
and inversely as the excitement. 

As the comparison therefore has held good 
in all those instances we have related, betwixt 
opium and stimulants, and in the production of 
those effects, which are the usual and principal 
effects of the action of stimulants upon the 
human body, we are led to the final conclu- 
sion, that the appearances, exhibited by the 
animal body under the influence of opium, 
are directly analagous to those exhibited under 
the action of a:ther and spirits of wine and 
volatile alkali ; that as these power* are sti- 
mulant, so in like manner, and depending 
upon equal prn'>^-, '- '^'^'um stimulant. 



9S 



ON THE MACHINERY OF THE 
ANCIENT EPIC POEM. 

BY THE REV. GEORGE WALKER, F. R S. 
Read Dec 2, 1800, 

If prejudice apart from sound judgment de- 
cide in matters of religion and philosophy, 
where sound judgment alone ought to be 
sovereign, it is not to be wondered,, if her capri- 
cious authority be sometimes found to usurp in 
the less regulated provinces of taste and cri- 
ticism, and her influence be found equally 
injurious to truth in each. It has been said, 
that, when system begins, genius ends. This,. 
like many other bold maxims, whose very 
baldness conciliates belief, must be subject to 
numerous exceptions ; for men of rcspectable 
talents are found among the friends and 
patrons of system ; particular systems owe their 
very birth to eminent genius, and the system 
of the universe Is referred to genius of the 
sublimest form. The maxim therefore is not 
universally true, for genius may be the author 
of system, and genius may be laudably exer- 
cised in conformity to system. But still there 
IS a considerable degree of ti'uth in the maxim ; 
for systems, however fabricated, and to other 



On the Machinery • &V. 99 

parents than a penetrating view of truth and 
nature are many systems indebted for their ex- 
istence, are in the habit of requiring an im-. 
plicit obedience ; they preoccupy the early 
mind, before it is fitted for individual exertion ; 
their rules become a law, without enquiry into 
the, truth and reason of the law ; iiiteJiect sub- 
mits to the law; her native freedom is fettered; 
and genius, naturally capable of originality 
and specific character, is stilled by -this domi- 
nant prejudice, and creeps along through ages 
in the dull walk of conformity to rules, where 
luiture perhaps would allow of a generous lati- 
tude.— More than two thousand years have 
passed since the days of Aristotle, but the 
system of Aristotle is still an imperial law, and 
is an interdict on genius in the walk of Epic 
Poetry ; for believing from a tame submission 
to authority, that every thing in the epic of 
Homer, from whom the system of Aristotle is 
altogether derived, is to be admired as the 
standard of excellence, we can neither bear 
with an epic production, which is original in 
its manner, and disdains the trammels of 
Homer and Aristotle ; nor can we bear with 
an imitation, for this is frigid and tasteless to 
us, because we have acquired another taste, 
which we can sacrifice only to Homer, or to 
Virgil. These a venerable antiquity has equally 
n2 



100 On the Machinery of the 

excepted from the decision of modern taste^ 
and^ I hiigtit add, of a taste more chaste, cor- 
rect atid elevated. The Poetics and other 
critical works of Aristotle, founded u|>6n the 
models of an old and almost barbarous anti- 
quity, have^ indeed, bound genius in chains, 
and to that tiilent of man, which of all others 
delights itt. freedom and ^li expansive range, 
and in h^i- favoured fiel3 'of poetry, has pre- 
scribed a liackneyed paA, where nature inh^r 
riche.<t^ and 'most luxuriant dress is not to be 
found. Hence the prejudice, that the poets of 
Greece and'Rome, but particularly of Greece, 
are stiperio'r iil ievery ext:elknce to those of later 
(lays. I liesitate not to -'deny the fa<it, but if 
itw^f^'^s by the gene'ral voice is supposed, the 
very prepoSsfessioli is isufficient to produce the 
etfect. They aVe, forsooth, the only standards 
of tfiie ta'std a^d elegance; excellencies have 
be^n disc/oveted in them, which in all probabi- 
lity, riie^r authors, \\^ith all the vanity of an 
author, had no idea of, ahd which the modern 
litetati neither see nor feel, but only -suppose 
that they see and feel ; and all praise for origi- 
tiality of thought, and fertility of invention, 
has bieeri' lavished on them'klone/ 

This partiality, w^hether Just or not, is 
without any difficulty traced to its origin. 
The writhigs of these poets: are almost our 



A)ici6iit Epic Poem, 101 

only literary companions in our younger days. 
It is the business of our instructors, to enable 
us to understand them, and their beauties are 
minutely and ahnost officiously pointed out to 
ti5. At an age, in which we make little re- 
sistance to any impres^on, and yet are remark- 
ably susceptible of impressions, and remarkably 
retentive of impressions, we arc taught to 
regard them as the very models of the beautifiil 
and sublime nn thought and - expression ; the 
graces of our own poets are either wholly 
unknown, or but transiently and partially in- 
troduced tt> us ; and Milton and Shakespeare 
are but second names with us. It is also un- 
favourable to a just esnmate of merit, th»t 
these impressions, are made at a period, M'iien 
the beauties of poetry have the easiest and -most 
agreeable access to us. The pleasures, which 
enlivened that happy period, are hallowed to 
our imagination with an enthusiasm, which for 
ever endeai^ to us the objects that excited them, 
but which no simikir objects will ever awaken 
again with the same kindly giow. Add to 
this, that those authors, whose taste in this 
walk of literature is commonly appealed toa^ 
decisive, concur with the impressions that wc 
are in the habit of receiving, our prepossession 
is strengthened by such respectable testimony, 
our judgment is flattered by such concurrence, 



102 On the Machinery of the 

and a very questionable prejudice takes posses- 
sion of our very understanding. Allowing to 
the Iliad and Odyssey all that a pure taste and 
judgment can relish and can approve, there are 
innumerable passages, which the same taste and 
judgmemt cann'bt enter into, which it may 
candidly pardon and excuse, but cannot sanction 
as absolutely proper, beautiful and. sublime. — 
But this would be of little moment, if it acted 
not . w^th a malignant influence on future 
genius. That gift, which nature, not art or 
rule, confers, is not permitted freely to exert 
itself; fancy is controuled in the free and vi- 
gorous exertion of its powers. Mi^lmoth has 
fustly observed, that this fondness for the an- 
cients has probably occasioned to us the loss of 
many. excellent originals. For though, continuqjs 
he, they may be proper and safe guides to those, 
who have not the greatness of mind to, strike 
out new paths ; yet, while it is thought a suffi- 
cient praise to be their followers^ genius is 
checked in her flights, and many a fair track 
Vies undiscovered in the boundless regions of 
itriagination. Thus had Virgil trusted more to 
his native strength. Home might perhaps have 
seen an original Epic Poem in her own lan- 
guage. But Homer was considered even by 
^his admirable poet as the sacred object of the 
first veneration ; and he seeme4 to think it the 



Ancient Epic Poem, . \ 103 

noblest triumph of genius to be adorned witli 
the spoils of this illustrious Grrecian. 

It is not, however, my intention, to di^uss 
the general question of the superiority of tHe 
ancient poetry above that of the modern; but 
only,' as the genus comprehends the species, to 
introduce the particular discussion, which is the 
professed subject of this essay by some men- 
tion of, and some opinion on the general 
question. The mythology of the ancients, whidi 
was the popular belief of their day, and on 
which the machinery of their epic' poem is 
founded, is supposed to derive to it its special 
advantage ; as this advantage is not allowed to 
the modern, because with a change of the 
popular creed no sympathy can be extended to 
him in the use of such fabulous machinery. I 
mean therefore to shew, that in its own nature, 
and with every allowance of belief,' it is a 
miserable machinery ; puerile ; with no con- 
sistency and unity of character; beneath human 
nature ; and, having no dignity in itself, inca- 
pable of conferring a dignity on the poem, 
which uses it and uses it as a principal sub- 
stratum of the poem. I might, without any 
circumlocution, appeal immediately to the 
sense of every one present, and expect a ge- 
neral verdict in my favour.. But, since the time 
of the ancients the question has a;>sumed a new 
3 



104 Oji the Machinery of the 

-fonn from the«ingenuity of some of the modem 
devotees to. the ancient poetry; and in the 
celestial actors, of whom the Epopoea and the 
Drama of the ancients makes such important 
use, we are not to contemplate real personages, 
but allegorical representations, in which alle- 
gorical interpretation every thing debased and 
low is excluded, and, adopting this idea, we 
are directed to contemplate a dignity in those 
actors, which as persons they are totally des- 
titute of. 

This allegorising of the heathen pantheon 
owed its origin to the impotent attempt of 
some pagan philosophers, of the later Platonic 
School, with a view to rescue paganism from 
the reproach of its rude and gross theology, 
which in its popular acceptation could not look 
Christianity in the face. Christian philosophers 
have taken the lesson from them, and the 
fine-spun theory which the former invented 
from a zeal for the sinking cause of the heathen 
religion, the latter adopted from an equal zeal 
for the honour of heathen poetry. What in the 
name of religion the better sense of mankind 
turned from with disgust, it was feared that 
their better taste would be equally disgusted 
with in the representations of the poets of 
Greece and Rome. The gods, as gods of an- 
tiquity, might fall into contempt and oblivion, 



Ancient Epic Poem, 106 

but the celestial machineiy of the ancients 
must be preserved at any rate ; and, as no solid 
base of support could be found, an airy and 
visionary base must suffice and poetical taste 
must be tau^^ht to worship what moral taste 
loathed. 

:rlt will be proper therefore, 1st. To examine 
on what foundations this allegorical interpre- 
tation of the pagan deities rests ; whether it can 
be maintained ; whether the allegory be sup- 
ported with any thing of that consistency and 
unity, which the , supposition of it requires; 
whether it be credible, that the poets of Greece 
and Rome, by the exhibition of their celestial 
machinery, designed real personages such as 
the popular faith received them, or merely an 
allegorical representation of certain dignified 
virtues. If, under this examination, the sup- 
posed allegory be found to be an unsubstantial 
fabric, the whole building, that is raised upon 
it, falls to the ground, and the macliinery in 
its plain and literal acceptation must answer 
for itself and must be tried by the rules of" 
universal good sense and taste, and by these 
rules it. must be decided, whether any poem 
can derive a dignity from the use of it. 

JUit,. before we can bring to the test of cre- 
dibility this allegorical metamorphosis of the 
heath<?n deities, twe must know precisely what 



106 0)1 the Machinery of the 

it means, and no better guide to this know- 
ledge presents himself than the celebrated 
Bossu, the great admirer and champion of the 
ancients. His definition of epic poetry \% 
that it is a .discourse artfully invented to form 
the manners by instructions, which are ^dis- 
guised under the allegory of some one 'im- 
portant action^ related in verse, in a probable, 
diverting and. surprising manner. Agreeably 
to this.delinition (in which the>' critics have 
tliought pjoper genc^rally to acquiesce) l>e de- 
fends the mf^iciiinery of the ancient epic poem 
against those, whom its apparent absurdity 
offends, by saying, thatj with a view of con- 
veying instruction by one gri:at moral, which 
formed .the ground-work of their poem, which 
the wholef'. action • served to illustrate, and 
wjiieh was conveyed by allegory, they meant 
that all their gods and goddesses should be 
considered as allegorical, or as representative of 
some mental, or physical quality or defect, to 
which all their actions are supposed to relatCj 
and with- a reference to' which they are all to be 
considered. 

r.iYsOu will please not to- smile at this fa^iciful 
statement, of the anciertt epic, because it 
would, disturb the sober view, that we are to 
take of iti^ There are^ in this statement, two 
distinc^; ; objects offered- to consideration, 



Ancient Epic Pocm.X) I07 

lst» wh(^ther thb ancients ever did .. injtend. to 
m^fceU tl>eir poem to cojidiice to one i^at 
mohil ; and 'idly, whether they designed to 
support that moral by a contmiK '1 riWi-^'t-.^-v^ 
and that tor this purpose all tl. ai 

niacjibiery, as composedT of mcro iikal port 
sonages, was introduced. 
rt^Ofadmit the first, viz. that iii. the epic 
pocriis of the ancients one great moral is 'in- 
tended and sup})ortcd througli . the whole^ 
would not materially weaken the argument of 
my I essay. But this position is open to? strong 
objections. It may.be.jsaid, that ithe letidc^f 
])oetry is not so much to scrveas. a: vehicle 'of 
moral . sentiment, as to please byjiddresiiiiYg 
itself to the imagination and passjons, ,in the 
conduct of which .many morak. oiay^jbe hicql- 
cated^ and many of equal; worth and dignity. 
With this idea the epics of Homer and \'irgil 
w^U accord, much better, I think, than widi 
the notion of one single leading moral through 
each of their poems. It would notrbc dithcult 
tQr. assign to each of these poen>s, a .variety of 
morals, each claiming pneccdency. w.ith sucb.^ 
sliew of probability,, as to leave it doubtful o^ 
which side the balance inclined. \, Poetry mus^ 
instruct, if it be any tolerable delineation of 
human character and passion 
rapt^ to a reflecting mind i^ cither a pp<iitivc, 
o 2 



lOS Oil the Machinery of the 

or a negative lesson. It is said, that the great 
moral of the Iliad is, to teaeh-the Greeks the 
advantages of union. The Greeks, in the time 
of Homer, had no formidable common enemy, 
iiSiin a later period, when the Persian power 
threatened the general ruin of Greece, at«t^ 
therefore, what circumstance suggested :r to 
Homer the importance of this moral, so as to 
found his poem upon it, is rather difficult to 
say. The critics, however, have pronounced 
this to be the moral, to w^hich the whole Iliad 
is adapted, and such an implicit faith is ren- 
dered to their sentence, that it would be con- 
sidered as a degree of scepticism to dispute it. 
It must be acknow^ledged, that this moral is 
fairly to be collected from the Ihad, but whe- 
ther Homer designed it, or no, and fashioned 
his poem to this purpose, is very uncertain. — 
It is probable that he took the tradition of the 
siege of Troy and the characters of its prin- 
cipal actors, as they were committed to him, 
and formed therefrom a popular tale, enriched 
with the embellishments of poetry. It is no 
wonder, that discord entered into the history 
and that Homer exhibited it in his poem,' be* 
cause he found it in the history; as discord could 
hardly fail to be the issue of a confederacy, 
formed by rude, undisciplined and indenendent 
chieftains. May it not with equal probability 



Ancient Bpk^ P(mn:' 109 

bfe^ suppos^ly that impi^ty arid in^Verente t<> 
<fhe ^o^ ift ihe person of Agamemnon, thb' 
general of the' whole (?onfLxlefate anny, whert 
he rejected the modest prayer of Chryses, the 
priest of Apollo, and treated him with indig- 
nity and inJiult, was the gr^t critiic, which tht^ 
poet meant to reprobate, ^rid iirf'the ^cqiiel'<!>f 
the poem'to' e^liibit the lortj^ train of calami- 
ties, which were the punishment of this crime ? 
From this impiety of Agarnernnon sprang the 
discord of the chiefs and all the evils, which 
foUbweid. T6 a people, trbmposed of a naul- 
titude of independent states, piety to thegod^ 
might be su^^posed to be a more important 
moral than concord. Homer, 'indeed, in the 
opening of his poem assigns the quarrel be- 
tween Agamemnon and Achilles, as the proxi- 
mate source of ^'tllfe '>i^f^« aXyex Kxxmc^ 
which constitute the history of his po^m ; 
but the irreverence of Agamemnon to Apollo, 
in the person of his priest, to which he imme- 
diately passes, is the primary cause. He de- 
scribes the indignation of Achilles, as the con- 
sequence of Agamemnon's irre\erent conduct ; 
and the first calamity of the Greeks is the inflic- 
tion of the offended god. If the probability of 
thi8, as a principal moral, be iidmitted, it will 
justify a farther inference of moment in this 
essay, that I lomer had no idea of mere allego- 



rieal p^raopages ii^ rhi^ ^ei<;ies, ti^at ,1^^ ;;^,c(^ivad{ 
th^tn, i^s pbj^pts; of se'ripu^ belief,, ^n^, coiysidered 
^ rdyerenee to them ja^-gf .jiigjiriipportaiice, ta 
thCj public \yelfarc.,rix- ^., -r;.' /;,. ' 

. ., -It, jis, ; ^an essential pjart, of this chimerical 
thesojy, that th^sp. allegorical personages, the 
dciti^, are introduced into the poem in ordei? 
tcv-giv.e a dignity to the. moral, and therefore it 
is rx?qui)*ed, that their whole ^ character and 
ajCtion.be conformed to the moraL .Now, if the 
^yils,, which. spring out of discord,^ and, the bles- 
sings, att<?ndant. upon uriio%|De.tl;ie! great mo/al^ 
9J9i.»r>V;hi9^i th^. .wholes platV; ^f f-h^ Vh<^ is. con- 
strji^ted, it must be confessed, , that, the cha- 
r^icterj which Homer has assignedto his allego- 
rical personages, is very ill adapted to tbis moral, 
and , very little calculated to give, efficacy and 
dignity to it. Inasmuch as they arc designed 
tafbe exhibited as beings of a superior or^er, 
^nd objects at least of popular reverence, they 
aught to :be clothed vyith som<^,,. dignity of 
character, and appear to be exem^pt from the 
fipllics ^nd passions^ which originate.;the: quarrels 
and .di§3ensions oi men. Every thing contrary 
to this- is^ the ;. character of liomer's celestial 
inachinery. They appear w^ith ilo dignity of 
character, with iio abstraction from the lowest 
follies, from the wildest passions of men; 
their, superadded agency presents no picture of 



' ¦ Ancient Epi^Poem;'^^ ^al 

wnion; ' iiYCukiatei no irhdralof union; the]^«ife 
p^rtizans in t'He private ahd public quarrels I ^f 
the Greeks; ethey are* iritendiaricB,; not-iiapt 
peasers; and' this not as a mode of iwllicfii^vA 
divine punishment on crime, which, it Homi^t 
had so exhibited flicm, wouW,^ indeed^' ' haVe 
presented a dignified moral and given a decent 
credibility to the reveries of his too passionate 
admirers ; but without the intimation of their 
acting from one moral motive, of their being 
the ministers, or even the instruments of justice, 
they range themselves on the part of the Greeks 
or -Trojans^ oy enlist under the leaders of the 
factions ; 'inflame their animosities arid -aid 
their vengeance; and it is severe suffering, not 
any thing in the character and conduct of the 
gods, that teaches at all to the Greeks, or to the 
Trojans, one moral lesson. In fine, there is no 
adaptation in any view, and as the creation of 
the poet, of the celestial machinery to any 
one moral whatever, and least of all to the 
moral of union. The supernatural agents of 
the; Iliad were assuredly neither in whole, nor 
in.p^rt, the creation of Ilonier ; as he topk his 
men, he- took his gods, just as he found them 
in the page of history, or from the mouth of 
tradition; he docs not appear to add t(\ -' 
detract from their historic character as Lc i 
ceived it, nor is there any thing in the most 



IVJ On the Madiinery vf the 

clispassionate view of the Iliads . which wiH 
support the notion, that he hadtoyiControliftg 
jn.pral in the eye '^f his , mind, according to 
which he constructed his poemi or that he 
fashioned and 3haped his men, and gods to 
fit there M-tbi^,. moral. On the subject of 
i)ne leading moral of tl^ Iliad, to which tl^ 
^vbole poem is supposed to be conformed, I 
shall add this farther observation, that besides 
piety to tlie Gods, which I hav^ already 
noticed, this other moral, whether . designed 
by Homer or no, is very strongly impressed 
on every feature of the poem-, and for which I 
have no less authority than. that of Horace, 
an authority of high respect in the court 
of criticism, 

Quicquid clelirant rege?, plectunlur Achivi. 

Which ma/ be famiUarly translated. 

When kings play thefool^ the people pay the piper. 

It requires also no strain of ingenuity t^i 
deduce this farther mo^al, as equally entering 
into the whole {)?ai^ikhM* all human ^v^nts' 
are governed by the gods, as this moral is 
not presented by the action, hut by the senti- 
ments to this purpose,^ which lie siiattered 
through the whole poem. '^'n;-: 



Ancient. Epic Poein, 113 

Upon the whole, I see no sufficient reason 
to conclude, that any one preconceived moral, 
as the ground-work of his poem, which was to 
be illustrated by the whole and to which his 
allegorical creation was to conform, had pos- 
session of Homer's mind. The history, as 
Homer received it, must suggest many moral 
reflections to him, just as in the conduct of the 
poem the same moral reflections will present 
themselves to the mind of the reader; but I 
can see no unity of moral pervading the whole 
poem and giving law to the whole conduct 
of it. 

The case* may be diflerent with respect to 
Virgil. He followed Aristotle, longo quidem 
intcrvallo, as Homer much preceded him. — 
Aristotle thought he saw an unity of moral in 
the plan of Homer's poem, and he considered 
it as one of the three necessary unities, which 
must enter into the composition of every heroic, 
or epic poem. Virgil, therefore, had a sup- 
posed precedent and law presented to him, 
and, influenced thereby, he might design one 
leading moral as the prominent lesson of his 
poem. It is supposed, that piety to the gods 
and resignation to the divine will are this pre- 
dominant moral. Piety and resignation to the 
gods are certainly a principal trait in the cha- 
racter of his hero iEncas. He designed his* 



1 1 4 On the Machineri/ of the 

hero through many difficulties and conflicts 
finally to triumph^ and, therefore, it might be 
expected, that his poem would be so managed 
as to derive the final triumph of his hero from 
his ascendant virtue, and to illustrate the ex- 
cellence of piety by a striking exhibition of its 
rewards. But the conduct of the poem 
presents no such view, and the piety of ^Eneas 
appears to have but . little influence on his 
fortunes. Not all his piety can soften the 
ha Sceva Juiionis ; nor is the interposition of 
any god, not even of the supreme Jove, in his 
favour, ever, that I remember, referred to his 
piety. The maternal piety of Venus, and not 
the resigned piety of yEneas to the gods in 
general, appears to be his most effectual friend.. 
Viro-il clothes his hero with the virtue of 
piety, bur, having- done this, the condufct and 
the machinery of the poem are but httle ac- 
Gommodated thereto. Virgil, I think, was of 
the Stoic sect,, and with submission to my 
lords, the critics, I would offer a conjecture,, 
that the Stoic maxim is not foreign to the 
spirit and conduct of the /Eneid, viz. that a 
consistency of character, and steady pursuit of 
one groat object will be attended with an ho- 
nourable issue, and triumph O'ver thp oppo- 
sition both of gods and men. If there were 
but a moral in it,^ but unfortunately it is of 
3 



Jncient Epic Poem, VIS 

those stubborn materials as to defy moral, I 
should mention one leading object of the 
yEneid with more ass'irancc ; that he intended 
to flatter his own nation in the character of 
iheir supposed progenitor and topcrsuade tlicm, 
that the empire, which thejr had usurped over 
the rights of natioas, was founded in. the im- 
mutable decrees of the Fates. 

L'pon the whole it does not appear, that 
Homer at all, and Virgil very little, if at ail, 
wrote under the influence of a re'ined and 
jsubtle moral. Of xither epic poets among the 
ancients, if epic poets they may be called, 
such as Lucan and Statius, it is hardly pre- 
tended, and therefore this moral, which is so 
interwoven with the flne-spun theory of the 
critics, from Aristotle down to Bossu, to which 
the whole poem is to be subservient and for 
which all the celestial machirjery is provided, 
may be little better than a dream, like the 
allegorical creation of the- gods, who act so 
distinguished a part in the ancient Epopcea, 
which is to be the subject of our next ex- 
amination. 



p *i 



116 On the Machinery of the 



PART 11. 

The principal object, for which this essay 
was undertaken, remains for the consideration 
of the present evening, viz. dismissing the sup- 
position of any one great moral and the alle- 
gorical interpretation of a more than human 
machinery, as subservient to the illustration of 
this moral, let us receive the epic poem of the 
ancients with its terrestrial and celestial agents, 
and enquire, whether the ancient Epopcea 
derives any advantage from the introduction of 
this supernatural machinery ; whether, the cha- 
racter of the gods and goddesses of the Greek 
and Roman heaven being in every view inferior 
to that of men, the assigning to such con- 
temptible personages so principal a part does 
not detract from the interest, and debase the 
dignity of the poem, whatever the genius of 
the poet may be. I know, that in this attempt 
I have prejudices to encounter, prejudices, 
which, having entwined themselves about our 
hearts in the dearest and most enchantinsr 
period of life, still retain a mighty power and 
subjugate almost reason itself. But if there be 
a truth in character, if there be a standard in 
nature, to which taste and judgment ought to 



Ancient Epic Poem, I IT 

bow, to this truth and standard I apptjal, and 
in despite of the dearest prejudices hope to 
make it appear, that, inasmuch as the ancient 
epic poem depends upon its' celestial machi- 
nery, this macliinery is a puerile and miserable 
allyi having no consistency, no dignity oi 
character, serving to no great or good end, 
exhibiting no sublime or moral lesson, beneath 
human nature, and, having in itself no Excel- 
lence or elevation, can administer no aid, re- 
flect no lustre on the poem, which adopts it. 

I shall examine this machinery of the an?* 
cient epic in these two views, 
. I. Whether it contributes to the moral, or 
morals of the story. -; . . 

II. Whether it contributed td raise the ima- 
gination, to exalt and excite in a higher and 
more interesting degree the passions, in whidi 
the epic peculiarly delights. 

I. If it be admitted, that instruction and 
moral instruction should be a principal object 
of the sublimcr epic, this end is not only not 
promoted, but absolutely perverted by the in- 
troduction of the heathen deities and the im* 
portant part, which is assigned to them in the 
ancient poem. Whether moral instruction be 
a principal end, or no, yet it is certainly re- 
quired of poetry in general, and much more 
of the graver and severer poetry, that it have a 



118 On the Machinenj of the 

-decent regard to moral, that.it do not corrupt,' 
if.it do not improve. We:turn ,a way from, the 
Pierre of Otway and the I lorriccjcof M^ycherJey, 
with as much aversion as from Catiline and 
Clodius, and, though all the' art: of Otway 
(which must be acknowledged to be' great) be 
exerted to interest us In the 'fortunes of liis 
hero, yet- the " feeble and transient sympathy, 
which he can a\\'ake5 cannot overcome the 
fixed abhorrence, which the villainy of the char 
racter has aroused. It is the happiest talent of 
a poet to: insinuate instruction w^ithout appear- 
ing to intend instmction^, .the heart is taken 
by surprise,' it is met iii its native iinnocence, 
and the most virtuous emotions are Excited and 
the most exalted lessons are' impressed. Of 
this talent Shakespeare is a rich example and^ 
in the exercise of this noble talent, he has 
made a rich atonement for his occasional play- 
fulness and wantonness. I will riot say, that 
in him the impressive moral of the stage has 
surpassed that of > the pulpit ; from me this 
concession would not be expected, nor 
perhaps be credited; but this I will say, that 
in representing the vanity of all human 
grandeur and power, especially when mixed 
with crime, and when, at the close of life, 
the mind is looking back on the scene, 
that has been passed, I. could wish even from 



'¦ \ Ancient Epic Poem. 1 1 9 

the pulpit to exhibit the delicacy and power, 
with which he has insinuated the lesson of 
innocent moderation and content, in the pa- 
thetic solilorniv of tl\(^ r'Hre-wom monarch, 
Henry IV. 

2oH ; 



6fi «iecp, O gentle sleep, 



Nature's son nurse, how have I frighted thee, 
Tliat thou no more will wtigh my eyelids down 
And steep my senses in forget fulness ? 

llien, after some lines of the sublime^t con- 
ception, in which, with the most splendid 
imagery, is contrasted his own elevated rank 
with the lowliest situations in life, he closes 
with this affecting apostrophe,.wherein, without 
the form of one moral precept, Jie reaches that 
moral conviction, which Solomon, with all his 
graver \Vdsdom, perhaps, shall fail to attain. 

Canst tniiT, O partial stetp, give thy repose 

To the wet -sea-boy in (he rurlesl hour 

And in the cajmest and most stillest night 

With all appliances and means to boot 

Deay it to a King ? Then, happy lo*v lay down ; 

Unhappy lies the head, that wears a crown. 

•'^ The pteccdilTg charalcter of Henry, as por- 
trayed by Shakesjicare, suggests this additional 
line; in which We dignir r'*^he moral lies, •' 

oj r»"A ,Qrcv^iv,qcnbiHcfetl wUh Ibc senic of crinoc. 



120 On the Machinery of the 

The example of Shakespeare, in a walk of 
poetry not greatly different from the epic, is 
alone sufficient to support me in this absolute 
position, that the genius of the graver poetry 
should never be opposed to the interests of 
virtue; and, though we read not an epic poem 
with the same view as a book of Ethics, yet 
that the sentiments obtruded by the , former 
should, at least, not be contrary to those, which 
are inculcated by the latter. 

But the divinities of Greece and Rome defy 
all moral and their character of divinity 
operates directly to the subverting of all moral. 
Folly and wickedness in human agents may be 
exhibited by the poet, or historian, with the 
highest moral utility, and w^ithout detracting 
from the dignity of the work; but not so, 
where deity and the only deity, whom we 
know and acknowledge, is presented to our 
view. Weakness, caprice, passion and crime 
in them dig up the very foundations of honour 
and virtue in the human mind. There is no 
alternative between this effect and pure 
atheism, or the abandonment of all religious 
principle whatever ; and, perhaps, the latter i? 
less to be dreaded. It is surely better, if no 
better faith can be found, that from a sense oi 
dignity and virtue, which we cannot part with, 
we should revolt from religion, than adh^e to 



Ancient Epic Poem, 121 

a religion, which confers a sacrednesson every 
basenes and vice. Yet such is the character, 
and such the influence of the whole pantheon 
o'i the ancients, the Dli Majores or Minores, 
in all the exhibition of them. It is with all 
their follies and with air their crimes upon 
their heads, as received by^ the popular faith, 
that they are introduced ii) the poem, and a^ 
auxiliaries to the heroes of the poem. 

The Pater Hominumque Deumque, the Su- 
preme Jove, makes his first appearance in the 
page of heathen mythology, as dethroning his. 
father and marrying his sister, whom, ac- 
cording to some authors, he^ had previously 
debauched. But nor the united relation of 
sister and wife, nor the divinity, nor perpetuity 
of youth as the attribute of divinity, nor the 
majesty of person, nor the lustre of her large 
blue eyes, in which Juno surpassed all the 
beauties of the celestial court, could secure 
the matrimonial fidelity of this Deus optimus 
maximus. Ungoverned and wide-ranging lust 
is the first feature of his character, and his 
history is that of a libertine, w^ho, by fraud, by 
corruption, by false appearances, or open 
violence, subjects every woman to his w^ill, 
whose unfortunate beauty excited his desire. 
And too often, with all the apathy of a sated 
libertine, he leaves the hapless victims Oi his 

Q 



122 On the Machinery of the 

lust to be the farther victims of the relentless 
jealousy of his offended queen. On the story 
of Clitoris, whom he violates in the shape of 
an ant, Vossius very gravely remarks, that 
thereby the ancients meant to inculcate, 
'' Quod ingentia plerumque a minimis mala 
orluntur." What does not the heathen my- 
thology ow^e to the ingenuity of some christian 
moralists ? The halter is not, indeed, a " dignus 
divino vindice nodus,'' but unprotected by 
supernatuTal pov^^er, this in our days would 
assuredly terminate the career of such a liber- 
tine on earth. There is, in a passage of 
Terence, a striking attestation to the }>ernicious 
influence, which the character of the supreme 
Jove must have upon the moral mind. A 
young debauchee justifies his conduct by the 
plea of Jupiter's example. Terence wrote in 
the purer days of the Roman Republic, and 
that in these days a Roman audience could 
bear such an appeal^ in behalf of licentious 
amour, is a strong proof, that the reflection was 
not singular, but that it was familiar perhaps 
to every one, who received this immoral deity 
as the supreme object of his worship. With 
this character for licentious ^mour and unre- 
strained lust^ Jupiter is acknowledged in the 
epic poem of the ancients. And such as the 



Ancient Epic Poem. 123 

Pater Deorum is, such are all the subordinate 
gods, who act their parts in the epic scene. 

Qui«queD u , .\ .i>, BacchiM, Apollo, Venuiquc, 
Vcs.lma sunt exempla lubidinisirrequietae. 

Equally immoral is the lesson, which "the 
providential government of this unprincipled 
god must convey. Here no great and un- 
changeable laws of justice present themselves 
to our view, but all the fluctuations of capri- 
cious favoritism and prostituted powef, with- 
out regard to the distinctions of right and 
wrong. A wife, a daughter, a son, a brother 
or a mistress, wheedles by turns this repository 
of supreme power, and points his thunder 
against the objects of their partial resent- 
ment, though in opposition tq t^e prior deter- 
minations of his own mind. Take a slight 
view of his conduct through the Iliad alone. — 
Thetis, fi-om the worst of motives, to gratify 
the pride and passion of her son and avenge 
a private affront on his whole country, solicits 
the interposition of Jupiter to befriend the 
Trojan arms, and bring disgrace and defeat on 
the Grecian host. The easy god yields to her 
malicious request, and influences Agamemnon 
to lead forth his army to battle, as a designed 
sacrifice. By the temperate counsel of 1 Ipctor, 
the bloody conflict is suspended, and Jupiter, 
q2 



1 24 On (he Machinery of the 

as if forgetful of his promise to Thetis, is bullied 
by Juno to disgrace the cause of Troy and 
awake the vengeance of the irritated Greeks. 
To effect this purpose, he gives the sanction 
of his godhead to an act of the most dishonour- 
able treachery, he sends Minerva, the goddess 
of wisdom, on this base errand, to incite some 
Trojan chief, in the security of the truce, to 
aim a deadly arrow at the breast of Agamem- 
non. The war is re-kindled in all its furv, 
and falls heavy on the Trojans, who, unpro- 
tected by Jupiter, are exposed to all the malice 
of Juno and Minerva. After great irresolution 
and inequality of conduct through several 
books of the Iliad, Jupiter seems to recollect 
his promise, and by his direct and indirect in- 
terference, the tide of victory runs strong in 
favour of the Trojans, and the Grecian army 
and fleet are brought into the most imminent 
danger of destruction. From this desperate 
situation the Greeks are rescued by the arts of 
Juno. Knowing the weak side of her husband, 
and that the allurements of beauty are irresisti- 
ble to him, she summons every charm in aid to 
her person ; by flattery and lies she obtains of 
Venus that coestus, to which a thousand graces 
are attached, and, thus attired, she seduces 
Jupiter to the idle dalliantcs of love, and di- 
verting his attention from the Trojan plains, 

3 



Ancient Epic Poem. 125 

other gods lend their succour to the Greeks, 
awake their courage, and the Trojans sink 
under their united attack. Jupiter, at length 
recovering from the lethargy of lust and sleep, 
beholds the sad reverse, which his Trojans had 
experienced during this fatal interval, and in- 
dignant at the imposition, which had been put 
upon him, he threatens the seductive author of 
it with all his vengeance. Here another trait 
of moral mind in this divine consort of the 
super-divine Jove presents itself. To her 
husband's accusation of her having instigated 
Neptune to take up arms in behalf of the dis- 
pirited Greeks, during his own amorous deli- 
rium, she swears to as great a falsehood as 
ever issued from the mouth of woman in her most 
pressing exigence. She confirms the lie by the 
strongest adjurations, by the dread power of 
Jove, by Styx, and more than alJ, — by that 
unbroken vow, her virgin bed, — that at no 
instigation of her's had Neptune turned the 
current of war in favour of Greece. But such 
is her own obstinate malice against Troy, that 
having withdrawn from the presence of Ju- 
piter, to whose will she had vowed submis- 
sion, while alarmed for her own safety, she in- 
stantly endeavours to effect her purpose by 
exciting the whole assembly of the gods to an 
open conspiracy and rebellion against the 



126 On the Machinerx) of the 

sovereign majesty of heaven, their lord and 
her lord. Such are the personages, whose 
favour and protection are io throw a lustre on 
the mortal heroes of the poem, and whose 
characters are to facilitate, and confer a dignity 
on the moral instruction of the poem. 

It would, indeed, be tiresome and disgust- 
ing to bring forward into your presence any 
other of the celestial actors in the Epic, in the 
view of moral ; nor is it my intention to pro- 
- secute the disgusting detail. Such as Jupiter 
and Juno are, such are they all, with little if 
any variation of character. The amour of 
Venus with Mars in the very court of heaven, 
and the exposure of the adulterous pair to the 
assembled gods, are a charmingly moral picture, 
and such gods are wonderfully calculated to 
aid the sublime views of the Epic Poem. In 
whatever light we view them, this is the ge- 
neral picture of them, that they are capricious 
equally in their favour and their anger, profli- 
gate in their manners, wicked from principle 
as well as passion, interposing w^ith their aid 
from no regard to justice or virtue, and where 
their vengeance falls, oppressing their human 
victims as their pleasure leads them ; and often 
for no reason, but that of tyrants and cowards, 
because their hand is uppermost. No instruc- 
tion of worth and dignity can come from them. 



Ancient Epic Poem. 127 

they corrupt, they co-operate with every evil 
passion, and familiarity with them is not fa- 
vourable to good impressions, even where; n 
better faith is received and acknowledged. 

But, perhaps, it may more interest you, if I 
shall shew, that they are as contemptible as they 
are ' immoral; that they constitute as puerile 
and feeble and uninteresting a machinery, as 
imagination could ever think of associating 
with human agency, in ; order to cmbeJlish 
and illustrate, the imitations of real genius. — 

For, 

^if H. Jf instruction be not promoted, but in 
truth counter-acted by the machinery of the 
ancient epic, neither are our imaginations 
raised, por our sublimer and more noble pas- 
sions at, all affc(,ted by the exhibition of such 
characters. In themselves, whether in their 
actions on earth q^,^ in lieaven, whether as 
mixing with men or each other, they appear 
w^ith no consistence of character, with no 
grandeur of^ mind or action, generally more 
the objects of contempt than reverence, more 
adapted to the satirical ridicule of Lucian, 
than to adorn and dignify the Epic Poem. 
How mean and low, how unsuited to the 
gravity of the heroic muse, are the feuds and 
quarrels and brawls of these gods and goddesses 
with each other ; how below even the cou- 



128 On the Machhery of flic 

duct of men, when committed to the influence 
of the same indignant and conflicting passions. 
How truly vulgar is the abusive tongue of 
Juno! How little superior to the impotent 
rage and gross language of a Billingsgate fish- 
woman ! ^ Nor less does ' Venus descend in 
her replies from the character of the Queen of 
Love^and Grade and Smiles. If they be beings 
above the walk of men, they ought, even in 
their passions and vices, to be clothed with a 
dignity superior to human actors -, but even 
human nature blushes for them. And are 
such exhibitions fitted to exalt the imagination, 
to stir one great and generous emotion of the 
soul ? How pitiful is the blubbering of Mars, 
when like a child, whose finger a pin had 
scratched, he comes whimpering into the pre- 
sence of his papa, Jupiter, and complains, that 
the man Diomed had disgraced him in the 
field, and shed his divine Ichor on the Phrygian 
plain. The limping gait of Vulcan, and his 
form and dress and manners adapted to his 
profession, or the scurrilous wit and jests of 
Momus, such as of a court fool in the palace of 
a feudal monarch, present a buflfoonery, w^hich 
would disgrace the banquet of men, but must - 
sink the character of gods during their con- 
vivial intercourse into absolute contempt. Are 
such the images, which the epic muse can 



Ancieiit Epic Poem. 129 

desGcnd to ? Can these excite one noble passion } 
Tis not the will of the implacable Juno, 
though next^in rank to the sovereign of heaven, 
which can *>^ise the bosom of the yielding 
ocean, and threaten the destruction of the 
hated /Eneas and his fleet, but her majesty- 
must supplicate the aid of a savage god in some 
wild region, who has the winds imprisoned in 
a cave, and shd debauches him from his* duty 
by tlic promise of a beautiful mistress. How 
ridiculous is the personification of these winds, 
who, from the volume of their lungs, can emit 
a power, sufficient to convulse all nature. — 
ITie Icelandic Edda would be disgraced by 
such a deification, nor is the idea of a Lap- 
land witch imprisoning a storm in a leathern 
bag more contemptible. Cotton has done 
them no injustice in his ludicrous exhibition of 
their modus operandi. What a rabble of gods 
and goddesses is exhibited to our view among 
the Dii Minores of the heathen mythology 1 
How low in their characters ! How mean in 
their functions ! Yet they all have a supposed 
being and ministration, and all- occasionally 
have their parts assigned to them in the 
Epopoea of the ancients. The Satyrs of the 
Woods, with their shaggy bodies, and their 
lustful propensities, the worthy attendants of 
the drunken Bacchus ; the god Pivn whh his 



ISQ On, the Machhie^ry'.qf the 

half humaft, half beastly fornl;:. the; ugly, pot- 
bellied, drunfeen : Sileniis, the fit preceptor of 
Bacchus;; (1:h?e,: versatile ; Proteus^ \yith his 
Cameleon transmutations and followed by, the 
deified monsters of the Deep; the sooty 
blacksmithg. in- the caverns of Mount ^'Etna ; 
the inf<ji:nal gods, not" l^s&[.horrid.ri9fH their 
persons rthjiri .in their minds, not ill pre- 
figurediby. the three-headed, porter of hell, 
whom a. greasy sop can debauch from his duty, 
with a thousand more, , constitute altogether a 
magnificent group ;;r they, form a glorious ad- 
dition to; the Dii Majorca, whom we have con- 
ternplated ;: they furnis^h a splendid imagery to 
grace the sublimer poetry of the ancients. — 
There is, indeed, ip the personification of the 
ideas of.;the mind, or of the rich scenery of 
tature.a; realcp(^etiG beauty, which man de- 
lights Ufii-whit^h gives animation and power to 
language ; land this is a"propensity common to 
men; it is not peculiar to the heathen mytho- 
logy, it has been the common vehicle of human 
description in all ages and nations. But these 
}^alY«: .mo- resemblance to the rabble, whom we 
have i noticed; this rabble, have a being and 
appropriate agency, and can with no dignity, 
with 1^0 bea;tity, be introduced into the higher 
walks of poetry. ,, . 

If we look in vain; therefore, for grand and 



Ancient Epic Poem. '^ ISl 

splendid imagery in the celestial niachinc|iy of 
the 42pic, what is there left of worth in it, if it 
aid none of the rich sympathies of the heart, 
whiclvare the principal feast that it looks for 
in the various exhibitioRs of the poetic muse ? 
-^'^Ut it' is^afewiicl?* charge against the offi 
cious intcrjx>sition of the heathen deities in the 
ancient epic, that it annihilates man, or sinks 
him into comparative insignificance, and thus 
destroys, or chills that sympathy, which is the 
attractive charm of historic poetry. 
^J'The heroism of fellow man, derived from 
the resources of human nature,' is- always 
an interesting object; but its impression is 
weakened, inasmuch as we refer it to the in 
terposition of a supernatural agent, especially 
of such contemptible agents, as are the heathen' 
deities, in whom we behold nothing but 
power, stimulated by no moral or generous 
impulse, directed to no wise or good end. Our 
sympathy with the man is defeated, for the 
man is not in sight, he is to us no more than 
the vehicle ; nor can we sympathise with the 
real agent, for he is removed beyond the field 
of human sympathy ; nor do we behold in him 
that dignity of character, which renders his 
interposition desirable, or interesting. I'he 
disgraceful character of their gods. casts a dark' 
^hade over every scene, in which they are in - 

R 2 



132 On the' Machinery of the 

troduced, and, if i\%Q\x povyer sometimes raises 
them above humankind, th^lr caprices, par- 
t;ialitiesj and vices sink them much below the 
human level. But it is to the reproach of the 
a.ncient epic poems, that the gods are gene- 
rally introduced, where, their agency is super- 
fluous, and where human agency is fully 
sufficient. It is almost laughable to contem-r 
plate the queen of heaven and the queen of 
smiles, uniting their superior agency to do — 
What ! to bring iEneas and Dido to bed tOr 
gather; which, if necessary to the plan of the 
poeni, might well enough have been left to 
pj'ain human nature, If the reconciliation of 
tl>ese two contending deities, so as to be con- 
sistent with the separate views of each, rcr 
quired the event ; yet it must be confessed, 
that their divine wisdom adopted a rather 
vulgar method of accomplishing it. It might 
have been managed as an affair of ingenuous 
love ; and, if deities must be summoned, Juno 
might have bestowed all her majesty on the 
b<jro, and Venus all her seductive graces on 
the Carthaginian queen. Thus the event 
would have been accomplished with more 
grace and dignity, th€ frailty of the fair one 
would have been more extenuated, and the 
gallantry of the Trojan better supported ; while 
jt would have afforded a rich field of elegant 



Ancient Epic Poem, 136 

and affecting description to the poet. But J 
mention not this as the most objectionable intro- 
duction of heathen deities into the ancient 
epic. The passage, as it has issued from the 
pen of Virgil, is full of beauties. More truly 
ridiculous and disgusting interferences of the 
celestial machinery abound. 

Sometimes, indeed, the representation of. the 
persons of the deities summons all the genius 
of Homer and Virgil, of each in their respective 
line of excellence. The miijesty of Jove by 
the former, and the grace of Venus by the 
latter, are animated descriptions of the grand 
and the beautiful in the human form. The 
one gave existence to the statue of Phidias, 
while it is not improbable, that the Medicean 
Venus suggested to Virgil his conception of 
the Paphian queen. There is a correspondence 
of form and elegance in both, and the vera 
incessii patuit Dea is presented in the per- 
ceptible and almost inchoate movement from 
the pedestal, which is so happily expressed in 
the statue. 

Homer and Virgil were poets of the first 
order. The question is not with them, but 
with the foolish and contemptible deities, 
whom the faith of their day imposed upon 
them. 

"^riiere are two ways, in which the superna- 



•1't>'4 Oh Hit Machhiery of the 

turtirbeingS'intet-fcre with the human actors of 
the^ poe^m . The one is by i' kind 6P insp iration , 
eTevatihg those, Avhoni they favour^ and de- 
pressing and terrifying those, whom they hate 
and persecute. This to a poet may, perhaps, 
be tolerated, though it is a miserable exhibition 
of the popular di-vinities^ and accounts too 
w^ir'for the debased moral of thd heathens, 
thcii- 'partiJtl ' affections, their • vindictive and 
implacable passions, their waht'of ^ll^ympathy 
for man as man. It may be considered in this 
^y, as a mere poetical fiction or imagery, 
fconveying in niore emphatic terms the idea of 
the grind, or -'the terrible. But the poetical 
illusion vanisHes', whfeh- in the second way 
tlie^ deitic^ lire personally introdticed on the 
sta^^e; never above, generally below the 
standard of nieii ; serving to no purpose but 
a^' the necessary appendages of a national 
lioein, or as a sacrifice to a political re- 
H*^ton, but derived from a popular faith, 
which was the very dotage of a low, gross, and 
vicious superstition. 

• Of this second class are the following -in- 
'fe^hces, which, among many others that might 
Be adduced, it maybe sufficient to notice. 
noDiomed is a warrior of the highest order. 
Is hiS heroism exalted by the personal accom- 
-[inriktient -and co-operation of Minerva ? 



' Ancknt Epic Poem » 133 

Strong in bcr tUengtli, and warmed wMiall l.c; ... 

JEnc^s is in 1 the most imminent danger iVoni 
his resistless arm. lliusfar^ is still tol(*rabfe, 
and, by a little more stniinof the imagination, 
Minerva might stiJl be donsidered as but a re- 
presentative, of: the' herps personal valour.— 
But A^bnus .personally interposes to rescue hed 
mortal son. She is foiled and wounded in the 
attempt; nor does Mars himself, the dread 
god of battles, fare better, ; when opposed t^f 
the martial goddess in the person of Diomed. 
Surely this ¦ is- heroism in burlesque. Those 
who can admire such a scene, must, methinks,i 
have submitted their taste and understanding 
to as low a standard, as It was reduced with 
the heathens by their wretched theology.—' 
Though Homer told the. tale, as he probably, 
received it from tradition, yet it sterns as if he 
felt the ridiculousness of the scene. When he 
sends the discomfited god blubbering up ta 
the court! of heaven, and impotently urging 
his complaints before his divine papa, who 
only mocks his sorrows. 

But that the .poet meant more than mer^ 
poetical allegory, by summoning his deities ;^q 
the aid of his mortal combatants, is evinced by 
their hiiiniUation in nuvinent; of dilUciiltv -ini 



1 36 On the Machinery of the 

danger, when deserted by their heavenly as- 
sistants. 

Hector is certainly a favourite character 
Y^ith Homer, both as a w^arrior and a man, 
lie is, indeed, in every view, the most illus- 
trious hero of the Iliad. From the gallantry of 
his spirit, he challenges the bravest knight of 
Greece to the combat. Ajax steps forth from 
the Grecian ranks to meet him. He is appalled 
at the tremendous figure of his antagonrist, but, 
though disdaining to fly, and summoning to 
the encounter both the soul and the resistance 
of a hero, he sunk under the blow of an 
immense stone, hurled from the brawny arm 
of Ajax, and must have perished, but for the 
intervention of Apollo, who, in the form of a 
Vulture (a sublime representation to be sure 
of such a god I) had been contemplating the 
combat. Homer, if he had pleased, could 
have rendered his hero victorious, by the more 
active and timely intervention of the same 
favouring deity. Hector is not disgraced, but 
he is conquered. Such is the combat of men, 
sustained only by the energies of man. But 
Hector is indeed disgraced, when in the 
combat with Patroclus he conquers, and his 
disgrace arises from the interposed assistance 
of a god, one of the puppets of this childish 
machinery. There is nothing in the preceding 
3 



AncicfU fupic Poem, \ 1^7 

history of PatrocKis, which cnti^|e4 him to be 
exempted frun) the honour of falling uoder the 
unaided arm of Hector, as Homer iiacj repeat* 
cdly exhibited him. To tliis unncccssarv in- 
terposition of a god is add^ 
disgrace of Hector's unmanly triunxph and 
insult over his prostrate and dying foe. Pa^. 
VrQcluSjin the agonies ofdeath, justly f:f3pUesj 

^ " Vain boaster ! cease! and know the pdWers cHvinc, 
Jove's and Apollo's is ihis deed, not ibine. 
To heaven is owed whate'er your own yon call. 
And heaven itself disarmeil me ere my fall. 
Had twenty mortals, each ihy match in raigkr, 
Opposed me fairly^ they had sunk in fight : 
By fate and Phcebus was I first o'erlhrown, 
£Qphorbus ne«t, th^ third mean part thy own. 

Homer has,liowever, rendered poetic justice 
to the hero, whom, in subservience to his 
celestial machinery, he had thus disgraced in 
his combat with Patroclus ; for. Without the 
aid of Minerva, the never-failing champion of 
the Grecian cause, cvun Achilles, that god- 
dess-born and invulneraole hero, on whose 
forbearance alone the fate of Troy seemed to 
be suspended, was not enabled to conquer the 
very man, who was so unequal to the encounter 
with his friend. To effect a death in battle b 
not a nodusy. dipino vindicc dignus ; the ma- 
chinery is a poor and artless refuge ; the poem 



138 On the Machinery of the 

sinks in dignity; and human heroism, its only 
proper subject, is debased. Virgil, too ser- 
vilely copying his model, has, in the last 
conflict with Turnus, dishonoured ^Eneas, in 
whose person he intended to do honour to the 
Poman story, iflneas conquered, not without 
a divine assistance, the King of the Latins 
knew from whose hand his death issued, he 
renders no homage to ^neas, his last words 
are, 

I feared no death from Ihee, 



Jove and a fiend from hell, have conquered roe. 

What is there then, which, in an appeal to 
taste or judgment, can plead with a modern 
the cause of the heathen deities, as an auxiliary 
of the ancient epic poem . The mythology of 
Greece and Rome is the most contemptible 
creation of man. We observe in it no whole, 
but a motley composition, formed out of dis- 
cordant materials, loosely adhering, and al- 
together presenting neither dignity, nor ele- 
gance; nor even the playfur luxuriance of a 
wild but captivating fancy. In its gross, 
ferocious and bmtal part, it most resembles the 
Icelandic Edda ; what claim it has to elegance 
and taste, as in the fiction of Venus and Cupid, 
appears to be derived from the licentiousness 
of the Syrian goddess, or in the animation, 



Ancleut Epic Poem, 139 

wliich it gives to all nature, from a poetic 
imagination, common to man in every age ; 
and with the whole are incorporated the irre- 
gular and desultory' actions of mere men of 
some early and rude age; altogether forming a 
most incongruous mass. — Had it been per- 
mitted to Homer and Virgil to have adapted 
this machinery at their discretion, and as a 
vehicle of dignified and elegant moral, it is to 
to be presumed, that they would have moulded 
it to their purpose with more taste and judg- 
ment. But obliged to receive it with all its 
absurdities and fooleries and grossness, its 
character in the appeal to true taste appears to 
be, that it disgraces their poems, presents an 
immorality beyond the utmost licentiousness of 
man, debilitates the human story, and in the 
most interesting exhibitions of human charac- 
ter, which constitutes the ])rincipal interest in 
the Epopoeia, takes the human agent out of the 
field of human sympathy, by placing him under 
the direction and controul of a more powerful, 
but more capricious and Immoral agency. 

Homer, in all probability, entertained as 
little doubt of the theology of his day as any of 
his rude and unpolished countrymen, and 
therefore, without scruple, admitted into iiis 
poetic history of the wars of Troy all the 
crudities of the popular superstition, with 

s2 



140 On the Machinery 0f4]ie 

which tradition i^ad liberally intermingled it. 
The faith 6f the Greeks and Romans ap- 
pears to have contemplated their supposed 
divinities, as having no nobler occupation than. 
%o be busiied with the interests and passions, 
and prejudices of men, and, though the expedi- 
tion against Troy had no higher end in view, 
fhan to recover a beautiful adulteress from the 
arms of her paramour, who had also violated 
the rights of hospitality, yei they deemed the 
cau«e of sufficient importance to interest the 
whole coutt of heaven, and thought the gods, 
to wh'om they ascribed the most partial and 
J3tienle affections, would enter into the quarrel, 
and ai^reeably to their several inclinations 
range the*mselves on the part of Greece or 
Troy, without any regard to right or wrong. 
Homer, therefore, witb.out a sense of impro- 
priety, might deem tlie celestial maehinery to 
be an embellishment of his poem. 

But It was not so with Virgil. In his day 
philosophy had rniade considerable progress, 
and the-refore no light and easy faith can 
well be ascribed to him. He was a Stoic, and 
must-have imbibed a thorough contempt for the 
fooleries of the popular creed. But this po- 
pular creed no Roman, however sceptical j, 
ever pubHcly insulted ; it was a powerful in- 
strument of siate policy, and though philosophy 

3 



Ancimt T.pie Porm. 141 

had tJiught the politer Romans to despise the 
religion ot their country, philosophy had not 
supplied them with any purer and nobler faith. 
Virgil fotinci a tradition, ivo matter whence 
^ierived, that the founders of liome, and par- 
ticularly the Julian family, were descended 
from yEneas, and that to the posterity of tjiis 
Trojan was promised extended empire, while 
already the Romans had avenged on Greece 
the cause of ruined Troy. On this ground, to 
flatter his country ^s pride 'gave bkth .to' his 
adn^ired poem, as this is interwoven with the 
whole structure of it. AV hatevcr, tlicrefore, for 
himself he might think, the design of his 
poem, -which was, in fact, a sequel of the his- 
tory of Troy, required that he should take the 
gods of his country, as he found them, which 
was also as Homer left them ; and tiiis being a 
state of admirable preparation for his purpose, 
he well knew that if he did but manage them 
^o as ultimately to flatter the ambition of Rome, 
this would constitute the strongest recommen- 
dation of his poem. 'J'o what degree his poem 
mus-t have gratified the Roman people, may be 
inferred from the applause, and almost adorar- 
tion, with which he was received, whenev er he 
presented himself to the public ^c\v. That 
Virgil, however, was not overpleased witH hivs 
ceyestial puppets, may he presumed from this 



.142 On the Machinery of the 

cimmstance. Though following the steps of 
Homer, he follows him less in the, use of his 
machinery, than in any other path. There is 
in the ^neid more of human character, dis- 
played in more varied action, and with less 
intervention and controul of supernatural 
agency than in the Iliad. The two poems 
have this characteristic distinction. Virgil's is 
the portrait of men. Homer's that of the 
gods. 

It would be a not incurious subject to com- 
pare the poems of Homer and Milton. They 
•are not unlike in several respects. As Homer's 
has been observed to be the history of gods, 
Milton's may be said to be that of devils. — 
The gods ¦ of the one, and the devils of the 
other are nearly of equal credit ; the former al- 
together, and the latter for the greater part, 
being the creatures of a popular and fabulous 
superstition. Homer had his Pantheon, Milton 
his Pandasmonium, each their courts and coun- 
cils, and each a supreme regent. But wherein 
they differ, the difference is immense in the 
estimation of the tw^o poems, with respect to 
their supernatural machinery. Willing or un- 
willing, man was subject to the caprice and 
violence of Homer's gods, and these gods 
usurped over the wdiole field of human action. 
While only by the consent of his own will 



Ancient Epic Poevi . 1 4 S 

could man be subjected to the influence of 
Milton's devils ; and, if suffering under this in- 
fluence, had still his refuge in an Almighty, 
wise and beneficent being. From the tyranny 
of Homer's gods man had no refuge what- 
ever. In the court of Homer's heaven all was 
discord and misrule ; god was opposed to god, 
and all the pretended power of Jove was 
impotent to reconcile the contending deities, 
or by awe reduce them to submission. Milton's 
Satan was truly sovereign, and an union of 
sentiment and design pervaded the whole of his 
gloomy domain. Milton's devils, though wick- 
ed beyond the stile of Homer's gods, are uni- 
formly grand, they exhibit that sublime of the ter- 
rific, which the epic aspires to. Homer's gods, 
though wicked enough,areasfoolish and freakish 
as they are wicked, they are not superior to what 
we may conceive of the lowest rabble in 
Milton's hell. I enter not into the heaven of 
Milton, and, perhaps, it would have been as 
well, if he had not so familiarly unveiled that 
sacred region. But there Homer presents no 
parallel, and the comparison fails. Tlie picture 
of man also in the two poems is greatly in favour 
of Milton, and shews the advantage, which is 
derived to the mind, that has deceived a purer 
ind nobler faith. Indeed to illustrate this ad- 
vantage and by contrast rxeite a stronger im- 



144- On the Machinery of the 

pressioa of i\\Q iiieanness and gnossness and 
worthlessiTcss of" Homer's supernatural ma- 
chinery was my direct view in this com- 
parison. 

\ye have se^n und^r j^hat circumstances^ 
Homier first and Virgil, {xom his^xampie, were 
led to adopt this machinery, and give to it so 
principal a part in their poems. But whatever 
<pircumstances submitted their geniuS; thereto, 
impose no fetters on the more ' correct and 
chastened taste of a better day. True taste 
and judgment are unyielding and unalterable, 
the plea of the man cannot alter the character 
of his work, nor any circumstances make that 
allegory, which is history, that moral, which is 
wicked, that dignified, which is puerile and 
contemptible, those heroes, who are macbine^^ 
noilrejicite sympathy, where the field of sym- 
pathy is destroyed. To support this charge 
a"-ainst the use of the gods of Greece and 
Rome, as the machinery of the ancient Epic 
Poem, has been the object of the whole essay, 
illustrated in a regular examination of the al- 
legory, the moral and the passions. The de- 
cision is left to your judgment. , 

If a supernatural, machinery be requisite to 
an epic poem, it- is' certainjy: oot to be sougbt; 
fbrnn the imagined inhabitants of the Christip 
Heaven. I ihink \\ would be foynd, if anjt? 



AnciciU Kpiv Poem, ll'p 

one of superior talent would attempt It, in the 
Genii, evil and ^od, of the eastern religions. 
It is not owing to any inherent defect in the 
COWCfeption of this machinery, th^t it doe's noi 
greatly interest us ill the eastetn romance ; it is 
managed by the writers of the East to its 
highest advantage ; they are deficient in taste 
and judgment, as must ever be, where man is 
not exhibited in that rich display of character, 
manners and moral, which the progress of 
western Europe has brought forth to view. — 
The eastern mythology is fitted for a more 
grand and interesting production of the epic 
than Greece or Rome has yet furnished. The 
Genii of the East, though the creatures of 
imagination, arc not much out of the field of 
probability ; they may be clothed with what 
magnificence and what consistency of cha- 
racter we please ; they comprehend all the 
machinery of Milton, his Panda^monium, and 
idle agency of benevolent spirits, without that 
offence which the introduction of the sacred 
personages of the Christian Heaven excites, 
and to give a sublime and moral dignity to the 
whole, thecontroul of a sovereign Providence 
is, with the highest propriety, admissible. 



H6 On the JLffect of Madder Root 

OBSERVATIONS 

Qn the Effect of Madder Root on the Bones 
of Animals, 

By Mr. B. GIBSON. 

Read April lO, i8oi. 



Ti 



HERE is, perbaps, no phenomenon, which 
Ciccurs in an animal body more curious, than 
the tinge communicated to the bones of living 
animals, whose food has been mixed with 
madder root. This, like many other facts, to 
which no reasoning t'/ /?r/(97'/ could have di- 
rected us, was discovered by chance. Mr. 
Belch&r, dining with a calico printer on a leg 
of fresh pork, was surprized that the bones, 
instead of possessing their usual whiteness, 
were of a deep red colour ; and on enquiring 
the cause of it, w^as informed, that the pig had 
been fed upon the refuse of the dyers' vats, 
and had received so much' of the colouring 
matter of madder into the system, that its 
bones were dyed by it. So interesting a fact 
has attracted very much the attention of ana- 
tomists, and has been used in many physiologi- 
cal and pathological enquiries; it may not 
therefore be uninteresting to give a short 



vn ihf Bo7WS of Antvials. 1 17 

history of the })hcnomcna connected with it, 
and the purposes to which it has been applied, 
previous to entering upon the more immediate 
object of this paper. 

Many experiments have been made to as- 
certain how long u time is required to produce 
the tinge, and whether it be permanent or 
only temporary. Belcher and Morand, about 
•the same time, mixed madder root with the 
food of chickens and young pigeons. The 
result of their observations was, that the tinge 
was more quickly communicated to the bones 
of growing animals, than to the bones of 
animals which had already completed their 
growth 'y the bones of young pigeons being 
tinged of a rose-colour in twenty-four hours^ 
and of a deep scarlet in three days ; whilst the 
bones of adult animals only exhibited a rose- 
colour in fifteen days. They found the tinge 
most intense in the solid parts of those bones^ 
which were nearest to the centre of circula- 
tion ; whilst in bonfes^of equal solidity, at a 
greater distance from the heart, the tint was 
more faint. The dye was deep in proportion 
to the length of time the madder had been 
continued, and when it was discontinued, 
the colour gradually became niore ^nd nfibre 
faint, till it entirely disappeared. According 
.to the experii;nents of these gentlemen, othe;. 
T 2 



148 On the Effect of Madtkr Boat 

other vegetable dyes, such as Logwood^ Tur- 
meric and Alkanet Koot, did not communi- 
cate therr respective tints t;o the bones,* 

This effect of madder upo.n the bones, was 
soon afterwards made use of by Du I lamefj in 
ills attempt' to prove the manner in which the 
bones of aniroals are encreased in thickness. — 
Observing in the vegetable kingdom, that the 
bark, by a sort of secretion, formed the ligneous 

^ part of a tree, in, successive layers ; so he con- 
ceived that the periosteum, or membrane sur- 
rounding bones, being converted hito osseous 
matter, encreased their diameter by adding to 
them concentric laminae in succession. In 
prder to prove the justness of his opinion, he 

jpiixed the food of a cock with madder root 
for a month, withheld it for a month, and then 

From same experiments I made on young pigeon*?, f 
found iba! a considerable quanlity of logwood, in the 
form of extracJ, conimupicated an evidently purpl<^ 
tint to the bones. Wi^h i:«?gJU',d,,t,o turrperic, it appears 
to be aHered in its colour by passing throu^^h the digestive 
organs, for the fceces of. ihe aniniid-, who took it in con- 
siderable quantity, v^'ere constantly green : whilst either 
logwood or madder root exhibited their rebpeclive hues 
after passing t through the inlcbtines. Saifron exhibits pro- 
perties different fronr) any of these substances; for 
though a pij^con took it in considerable qnaniitv and 
thereby had its fceces tinged, yet no perceptible altera- 
liou of coltuir was produced in its bones. 



on the Bones of Animals. ^ 149 

gave it again. Hb afterwards kiiled the 
aiiinial, and ujx>n mspcctioa thought he ob- 
served the appearance, wh'xh he expected; 
viz. two layers of red bpnc inclosing ^ne bf 
^vhite, corresponding to the periods of the 
raadder's being given or withheld. 

This experiment, and some others related by 
l>u Ilamel, appear to be' conclusive in fcivour 
ui' the theory, which he wished to estahEsh ; 
and as they were conducted by a physiologist 
of high character, the accuracy of tlie oh|- 
servations could not liavc been doubted, had 
these experiments stood alone. But when they 
^e compared with some of his own previous 
Cixperimcnts, and those of other authors, it is 
diihcuit to reconcile tliem. In some of D« 
1 lameFs experiments, for instance, the bones 
of a cock were tinged of a rose-colour through 
their whole substance in sixteen days, and 
those of young pigeons of a deep scarlet in 
three days. In several experiments I have 
made on the subject, 1 have found the bones, 
of young pigeons tinged of a uniform rosc^ 
colour, intenrally as well as externally, in 
twenty -four hours. This communication of 
colour to the whole substance of the o$seoug 
system in so short a time, makes it highly im- 
probable that ihe himinated appearance, re- 
!narktM] \j\- Dn ILrv-l. was produced by th- 



130 On the Eject of Madder Root 

new formation of red and vvhlte osseous layers* 
corresponding to the times (months) the 
madder had been given or withheld. For, as 
Mr. John Bell' very justly rem.arks, * " If a 
"jbbne should increase by layers thick enough 
" to be visible and -of a distinct tint, and such 
*' layers be continually accumulated, upon 
" each other every week, what kind of bone 
" should this grow to?'* The only way in 
which we can reconcile with each other the 
phenomena observed in the difierent experi- 
ments, and account for their apparent contra- 
diction, is; by. supposing, that Du Hamel 
mistook for an obscurely laminated appearance, 
the variety in the tint, which is more deeply 
communicated to the more solidy and more 
faintly to the less compact parts of a.bone. 

This property of madder of tinging the 
bones of animals, has lately been employed by 
Dr. M'Donaldjf in his ingenious researches 

into the formation and death ; of bones. 

Amongst other objects, he attempted to as- 
certain, in what manner and how soon, a 
cylindrical bone is regenerated to supply the 
place of one artificially killed. As the process 
is highly curious, I shall briefly relate the prin- 
cipal points. 

* Anatomy of the h(ne', &r. p J 5. 

•f Disputatio inaiiguralis fie Netro?) ac Callo. 1799. 



on tJie Bove.'f of Animals. 151 

Dr. McDonald's experiments were niade by 
amputating the proper leg-bone of young 
pigeons or chickens immediately above the 
joint. The marrow was then extracted, and 
the cavity, which contained it, filled with lint. 
This process caused the death of the bone, and 
the formation of a new bone surrounding that 
destroyed, erisued. Immediately after the 
experiment, the animal had its food mixed 
with madder root, and the part was inspected 
in different animals, at different periods. 

On examination tliree days afterwards, the 
periosteum or enveloping membrane, was 
found much thickened ; and underneath it a 
gelatinous humour was effused, surrounding the 
dead bone, and spotted with red osseous 
nuclei ; proving that the regeneration of the 
bone had commenced at this early period. 

In seven days the new bone was found soft 
and flexible, not to be distinguished from 
cartilage or gristle, except by the red tint the 
madder had communicated to it ; yet the bone 
destroyed Was not at all coloured, although 
the other bones of the animal had acquired a 
bright red. From this time the new bone 
continued to encrease in hardness, surrounding 
the old one like a sheath . The latter in about three 
we^ks was so loose "as to be drawn out, and 
in about fifteen days from, this Vime, the cavity 



1*52 On the Efecl of Madder Root 

of the rej^nemted bone was filled with itltir- 
row, and in every respect performed the office 
of that, for which it w^as a substitute. Tliis 
ihay b^ considered as a general outline of the 
progressive changes, which take place during 
tlie regeneration of a cylitidrieal bone, in a 
yoiing animal, such as a pigeon, or chicken ; 
and the same process is frequently performed 
ih the human body, when, from some internal 
cause, the life of a bone is destroyed. These 
changes involve many interesting particulars ; 
but the circumstance most immediately con- 
nected with the subject of this paper is, that 
although the shaft of the bone required three 
weeks for its renewal, yet in seveh days the 
osseous system generally had acquired a bright 
red. Now if w^e explain this change in co- 
lour according to the common opinion of ab- 
s'orption of the white, and deposition of the 
red osseous matter,* we must necessarily draw 

* The common opinion of physiologists, <vi(h regard to 
this curious fact, is, that when a bone becomes red, 
during the cNhibirion of madder root, the white osseous 
particles which composed it, have Jbeen ehiirely remov^tl 
by absorption and replaced by new osseous matter of a 
red colour : and when a bone assumes its natural colour, 
these red pariiclfs have been removed and replaced by 
«i'hile. It » his be the fact, it necessarily foll<)v\ s, that a:i 
aumiai has at len.l fifiy-two new sets of bones in a year ; 



on the Bones of Animals. 153 

this conclusion ; that the osseous system of the 
animal will be renewed three times during the 
period, which the formation of the substitute 
bone requires ; a conclusion which we should 
be inclined to reject merely from its improba- 
bility. But besides this, the appearance of 
the parts strongly militate against it — for, if 
we may judge at all of the activity of the 
process in the two parts, by their comparative 
degrees of vascularity, that employed in form- 
ing the substitute bone far exceeds that going 
on in the osseous system generally ; one strik- 
ing phenomenon attending the regeneration of 
a bone being, the very high degree of in- 
creased vascularity, which the parts employed 
in the process rapidly assume. 

After this effect of madder upon the bones 
was known, it long remained a mystery, why 
some other white parts of the body, such as 
nerves, cartilages and periosteum, were not 
equally liable to be coloured by it, as the bones. 
This fact, I believe, did not receive any ex- 
planation, until Dr. Rutherford gave a very 
ingenious and satisfactory one. When spcak- 

for the osseous system, according to ihe experiments of 
the 'most respcciable physiologibts, acquires a deep red 
tint from madder in one week, and assumes its nalural 
colour in another. 



154 On the Effvcl of Madder Boot 

ing of this property of madder, he says,* " Wc 
** have, in the fact before us, a beautiful ex- 
" ample of a particular case of chemical at- 
" traction ; such as in nmnberless instances, 
" is observed to take place, between the co- 
" louring particles of both animal and ve- 
" getable substances, and various other bodies, 
" especially earths and earthy salts, and oxydcs 
" of metals. So strong is the affinity of the 
*' colouring matter to- these bodies, that it is 
" frequently observed to quk the menstruum, 
*' in which it may chance to be dissolved, to 
" unite with them : they, in consequence of 
^' its union, acquiring a particular tinge, 
" whilst the menstruum is proportionably de- 

" prived of colour. From this principle, 

" this mutual attraction, is deduced the va- 
" rious use of those bodies as mordents, as 
" they are called, mtermedia, or means for 
" fixing the colours in dying or staining thread 
" or cloth, whether it be campos(!d of ani- 
" mal or vegetable materials. Upon the 
" same principle depends the preparation of 
" those pigments, known to painters under 
** the name of lakes ^ these are truly precipi- 
" tates of the colouring matter, in combina- 

* See Dr. Biakc's inaugural Disserlalion. Do dcatium 
formalione. p. 119.— 179S. 



¦on ///'• Hears' of Animal^'. 155 

^' Uon with various mordents, as tl^.cir basis. — 
" the colouring of the bones of a living animal 
" by means of madder, is, in every circum- 
" stance, analogous to the formation of these 
" lakes. The colouring matter of madder, 
** passing unaltered through the digestive 
" organs of tlie animal, enters the general mass 
^* of fluids, and is dissolved in the serum of 
**' the blood, to which, indeed, if it be in 
" large proportion, it communicates a sensibly 
*' red tinge- Bui there is akvays present in the 
" bloody and in a statue of solution hi the senon, 
" a quantity u^' the earthy matter of tJie bones^ 
^' phospiiute of lime, ready to be deposited, as 
'' the exigeneies of tlw animal may require, — 
** Now the phosphate of lime is xin excellent 
" mordent to madder and has a strong affinity 
" to ity and is consequent b) admirably fitted to 
** afford a base for the colouring matter of it ; 
" in suck experiments y therefore, they concrete 
'^ in the state of a bright red lake, wheme the 
" colour of the hones is derii^ed. That this is 
''* actually the case, may be shewn by a variety 
'** of experiments. Thus, if to an infusion of 
" madder in distilled water, be added a httle 
" of the muriate of lime, no change is per- 
** i:eived : but if to this mixture be added a 
" solution of the phosphate of soda, imme- 
'* ^diately a double elective attraction takes 

LT '2 



156 On the Effect of Madder Root 

" place. The muriatic acid combining with 
*^ the soda, remains suspended, or dissolved 
" in the water ; wliilst the phosphoric acid, 
" thus deprived of its soda, combines with the 
" lime, which the muriatic acid parted with, 
*' and forms phosphate of lime or earth of 
" bones. This substance, however, being in- 
" soluble in water falls to the bottom ; but 
'' having combined at the instant of its forma- 
" tion, with the colouring matter of the 
" madder, they fall down united into a crim- 
" son lake ; precisely of the same tint with 
" that of the bones of young animals, which 
" have been fed with madder. From this 
" simple representation of the matter, we have 
" a ready explication of every circumstance, 
'^ which has been remarked as extraordinary 
'^ respecting this subject.'* 

Whilst Dr. Rutherford thus gives a most sa- 
tisfactory explanation of the colour of madder 
being communicated to the bones alone, of all 
the white parts of an animal ; we find that he 
embraces the same opinion, as other physiolo- 
gists ; that the osseous materials agquire their 
colour previous to their deposition, whilst in a 
state of solution or mixture in the blood ; from 
whence they are afterwards deposited, and 
concrete lil th^ form bf a bright lake. In no 
part of his ingenious remarks does he Mnt- at 



on the Bones of Animals. ,J57 

the probability, that the bones, already formed 
in ail animal, may, during the use of madder, 
become red, and after its disuse gradually 
resume their natural colour, by the agency of 
a power entirely independent of their depo- 
sition and absorption ; That this is probable I 
shall now proceed to prove. 

Before it was discovered that madder pos- 
sessed this property of tinging bones, phy- 
siologists had long been of opinion, that th^ 
various parts of the body, being worn out by 
the performance of their actions and function?, 
were gradually removed, emd replaced by n^^v 
materials. They had seen, as Mr. J. B^ll 
observes, the whole osseous system by tjie 
morbid removal of its solid part, rendered so 
soft and flexible as to bend under the common 
weight of the body and ordinary action of 
parts ; the regeneration of many bones which 
had been destroyed by disease ; the rapid ab- 
sorption of fat in some diseases, and its speedy 
reproduction ; and lastly, the gradual change 
which the fluids of the body undergo, as well 
as some of its insensible parts, the hair and 
naiisj hence they supposed that the s^me 
process of change and renovation went op in 
ev<?ry' organ, and that the bodies of aninwis 
were not composed of the same identical 
particles, of which they would consist at some 

3 



158 On the Efecf of Madder Roof 

future period. This process, which was before 
but conjectural, or supported by analogy, phy- 
siologists considered as fully proved by the 
effects of madder upon the bones. They had 
by this means an opportunity of seeing the 
bones altered in colour, from the slightest tint 
to the deepest red ; they could observe this 
gradually removed, until the bones had re^ 
gained their natural whiteness ;and explaining 
the whole process on the principle of deposition 
and absorption, they considered it as ocular 
demonstration of a most rapid change in the 
constituent elements of a part, of which, from 
Us solidity, they could scarely have believed it 
susceptible. 

I apprehend, however, that it is by 
giving an erroneous explanation of the 
phenomena ; by supposing that a change in 
the osseous particles is denoted by an alteration 
in their colour, that physiologists have con- 
sidered this fact as conclusive. However in- 
dubitable and well supported may be the 
opinion, which attributes an imperceptible 
change to the various parts of the body, we 
shall, I believe, discover upon a more close 
examination, that it is by no means supported 
by the appearances, which the bones display 
on the exhibition of madder root. The rapid 
change in their particles, which such ap- 



on the Bones of Animals, 15^ 

pcarances indicate, when explained in the 
common way ; is completely at variance witli 
all the processes performed by the boi^s, both 
in their healthy and diseased states. Thus we 
find the formation of the ossific matter, called 
Callus, for the union of fractured bones; or 
the exfoliation of a part of a bone, are processes 
requiring a considerable length of time for 
their performance. In Dr. M'Donald's ex- 
periments, the formation of a regenerated bone 
required nearly six weeks ; but during the 
same space of time, the bones of the same 
animal would be renewed several times, if the 
common explanation of the communication 
and disappearance of the tinge of madder were 
well founded. From these circumstances, I 
am led to believe, that the appearances pro- 
duced by the exhibition of madder, require 
another mode of explanation. That which I 
have to offer is not liable to the same ob- 
jections, and is strongly supported by com- 
parative experiments. 

It was observed by Du Hamel, in hi^ ex- 
periments, that the bones of animals, which 
had been deeply tinged by madder, by long 
exposure to air lost their colour and became 
white, it was this fact which suggested to me a 
simple explanation of the process. It occurred 
to me, that if any one of the component parts 



160 On the Effect of Madder Root 

of the blood naturally exerted a stronger at- 
traction for the colouring matter of madder, 
than the phosphate of lime, it might be de- 
prived of the tint by a chemical power. In 
drd^ to prove this, as far as I could by ex- 
periment, I took one dram of the phosphate of 
lime tinged, as in Dr. Rutherford *s experi- 
ment, and exposed it for half an hour to the 
action of two ounces of fresh serum, at the 
temperature of 98 degrees. By this operation, 
the serum gradually acquired a red tinge, 
whilst the phosphate of lime, was proportiona- 
bly deprived of colour. In a comparative ex- 
periment, a similar quantity of tinged phosphate 
of lime, was exposed to the action of dis- 
tilled water under similar circumstances ; but 
no change took place. The knowledge of this 
•strong affinity, in the serum for colouring 
matter, affords an easy and simple explanation 
of the effects of madder on the bones, upon 
the principle of chemical attraction. 

Thus, when an animal has madder mixed 
w^ith its food, the blood becomes highly 
charged with it, and imparts the superabun- 
dant colouring matter to the phosphate of lime, 
contained in the bones already formed ; as it 
circulates through them and moistens them 
throughout. But as soon as an animal has 
ceased to receive the madder, and the blood 



on the. Bones of Animals, IGl 

is freed from the colouring matter by the 
excretions, the serum then exerts its superior 
attraction, and by degrees entirely abstracts it 
from the phosphate of lime, and the bones 
resume their natural whiteness. In short, the 
bones are at one time dyed by the colouring 
matter, at another time bleached by the 
serum. 

Whilst I have attempted to explain the ptd- 
bable manner in which the bones, alre^ady 
formed in an animal, at one time receive, 
and at another are deprived of the colouring 
matter of madder, I by no means intend to 
assert ; that the phosphate of lime does not 
acquire a similar colour during its solution in tlie 
serum, or at the time it is precipitated from it 
to enter into the composition of the bones ; 
the fact is indisputable. I have, however, 
found from some experiments lately made 
upon a hen during oviparation,that only a slight 
tinge can be communicated to the shell, fornied 
whilst a large quantity of colouring matter is 
circulating with the blood. So slight indeed 
is the blush, that it would not be seen by a 
common observer, unless contrasted with a 
natural ^o^g : which is probably the reason 
why it has, I believe, been denied by physi- 
ologists, that the shell of the egg is altered by 
the exhibition of madder. If this may be con- 



1G2 On the- Effect {if Madder Root 

sidcred as a test of t-lie quantity of colouring 
matter, v/hich the phosphate attracts at the 
time it is separated from the blood, it forms 
another strong argument against the theory, 
which Dr. Rutlierford, and all preceding phy- 
siologi^U:s liave adopted , for, consistent with 
this fact, the bones should never exhibit more 
than a slight blush. When explained upon the 
principle of chemical attraction, we see that the 
phenomena, exhibited by the bones of an 
animal, by giving or withholding madder root, 
give no support to the opinion that the 
¦various parts of the body continually undergo 
an imperceptible change ; and I consider it a 
fortunate circumstance for that doctrine, that 
80 simple an explanation of the effect of madder 
can be given. For whilst so specious a fact 
has been considered, by the highest authoriliesy 
as complete proof of the imperceptible renova- 
tion of parts; the rapid change in the con- 
stituent element? of . the bones, wdiich the 
communication and disappearance of the colour 
'indicates, mus1^_^havc appeared astonishing to 
every physiologist. Of this I cannot give you a 
stronger instance than in the w^ords of Mr^ J. 
Bell.^^ ''Nothing," sayshe, "can be more curious 
" than this continual renovatiiDn and change 

'' Anatomy of ihc bones, &c. p. 13. 



on the Bones' nf /1nimah\ 163 

" of parts oven in the harcicM bones. We are 
" accustomed to say of the whole body, that it 
" is daily changed ; that the oklcr particles 
" are removed, and new ones, supply their 
"place; that the body is not now the same 
" individual body, that it \vas ; biit it coulci 
*^ not be easily believed that we speak only 
*' by guess concerning the softer parts, which 
" we know for certain of the bones. — When 
*' madder is given to animals, withheld for 
" some time and then given again, the colour 
" appears in their bones, is removed, and ap- 
** pears again with such a sudden change, as 
" proves a rapidity of deposition and absorption 
** exceeding all likelihood or belief; all the 
" bones are tinged in twenty-four hours ; in 
" two or three days their colour is very deep, 
** and if the madder be left off but for a few 
^ days, the red colour is entirely removed.'* 

Although by this chemical explanation of 
the effect of madder upon the bones, the doc- 
trine of the imperceptible change in the com- 
ponent parts of animal bodies, loses the support 
of a foct, which has, since its discoveiy, been 
universally consickrcd as its strongest proof; 
nevertheless, indisputable arguments, derived 
from different sources, still place that doctrine 
amongst the best supported opinions in phy- 
siology. 



164 On the Use and Abuse of 

On the USE and ABUSE of 
POPULAR SPORTS and EX- 
ERCISES, resembling those of the 
Greeks and Romans^ as a National 
Object. 

By SAMUEL ARGENT BARDSLEY, M. D. 

Read March igth, 1S02. 

iriUMAN nature is so constituted as to re- 
quire both bodily and mental recreation. This 
instinctive propensity to amusement in man, 
is suuiciently proved by the universality of the 
appetite, in every stage of life, under every va- 
riety of clime, and constitution of government. 
But the regulation of this natural propensity 
differs greatly according to the circumstances 
under w4iich he is placed. The recreations 
and sports of mankind are therefore diversified 
by the influence of moral, political and phy- 
sical causes. The means of gratification are 
various and complex : the end simple and 
uniform. To escape Ixom the sensations which 
may be induced by too great or too little ex- 
ertion of body or mind, and to enjoy the 
pleasure which sympathy extracts from the 
varied intercourse with fellow man, give rise 



Popular Sports and Exercises. 165 

to that fondness for public diversions and 
sportive contests, so conspic^ous!y displayed in 
the history of rpankipcl.-TThe influence of 
physical causes, ip regulating the nature of 
these diversions, may be readily conceived. 

The hardv, strenuous and active amusements 
pf the inhabitants of the temperate and frigid 
zones, would depress and exhaust, rather than 
enliven and invigorate, the residents of la torri^ 
clime. Hence the supreme delight of the 
Asiatic consists in the enjoyment of those 
pleasures which are purchased with little 
fatigue of body, or agitation .of mind. To' 
inhale the grateful fumes of his pipe, and to 
foil his adversary in the stratagems of chess, or 
other sedentary games, constitute the principal 
part of his amusements. 

Although physical causes necessarily circum- 
scribe the sphere of man's active pursuits, yet 
they have much less controul than those of a 
moral and political kind. Man is endued above 
all other animals with a frame and constitu- 
tion w^hich can adapt itself to every diversity 
of clime and change of temperature. He can, 
in a measure, subdue physical obstacles, when 
powerfully stimulated by moral and political 
causes. — The savage, compelled to hunt his 
prey for food, has little leisure to cultivate his 
intellectual taste and powers. — If not expose4 



166 ¦ On the Use and Abuse of 

tx> danger from hostile neighbours, his recre- 
ations are mostly of a negative kind. — He is 
happy when idle and at ease. But if he be stimu- 
lated by the prospect of war, all his amuse- 
ments tend to accomplish him for carrying on 
Successfully his military exploits. His songs 
are praises of the heroes of his nation ; and his 
dances are connected with martial discipline. 
The public shews and festivals of his country 
are, almost without exception, of the character 
of savage war.* 

^ According to tbe degree of civilization 
will the public sports and amusements of 
a people partake more or less of the mixed 
character of corporeal and mental recreation. 
A display of the arts which refine and glad- 
den life, can only flourish where the condi- 
tion of man has been long meliorated by the 
enjoyment of moral and political advantages. — 

* The savage tribes of Aurerica furnish various proofs 
of the truth of this remark. Likewise in Collins's ac- 
count of the nnlives of New Holland, there is a curious 
illustration of the propensity of a rude and savage people 
to those arausements which are adapted to their peculiar 
situation. 

Indeed the singular and ludicrous ceremony of initialing 
voulh into the rank of warriors, at the celebration of 
their military exercises and games, is a striking instance 
of that disposition to amusement, which even the mo^t 
lavage and wretched state of life cannot eradicate. 



Popular Sports and Exercises. -1)57 

Indeed the kind and nature of the popular 
sports and exhibitions of a people, whether 
just emerging from barbarism, |0r passing 
through the various stages of improvement, or 
arrived at the highest pitch of refinement, serve 
to measure, as by a scale, the different degrees 
of their advancement to the acme of civiliza- 
tion. The two most powerful and celebrated 
nations of antiquity, Greece and Rome, afford 
ample proofs of the truth of this remark. The 
shews and public sports of each of these 
nations, while they issued from their character 
and manners, operated on this very character 
and manners, and rendered them more ardent 
and permanent. This connection between the 
character of a people and their sports, was for- 
cibly impressed on their legislators and rulers. 
Their public games were instituted for other 
purposes than mere amusement and relaxation. 
They were rendered subservient in Greece to 
the noblest views of legislative policy. In- 
timately connected with the whole system of 
government, w^hether civil, military, or reli- 
gious, they had a moral as well as a political 
tendency. To promote ardor, emulation, 
friendship, patriotism and all the animated 
principles and connections of active life, the 
Olympic, and other solemn festivals, w^ere in- 



Jds On the Use and Abuse of 

^tituted. In or.ler to investigate Some of the 
moral and political effects of these popular 
Sports and public games, which contributed 
tb largely in raising the Greeks and Romans 
to a height of unparalleled grandeur, it will be 
necessary to examine the foundation of a 
system, which, in some respects, when freed 
from its worse abuses, particularly those 
which the more ferocious character of Rome 
introduced, may not illaudably nor unusefully 
be imitated by the most civilized nations. 

Though it may, perhaps, be admitted, that 
the difference in the state of knowledge and 
general policy, in the ancient and modern 
world, will not admit of a close approximation 
ih the system of their public sports and amuse- 
ments ; yet the principles to which the Greeks 
directed their attention in controuling popular 
amusements, deserve the limited imitation of 
every free and enlightened people. For, their 
aim was to direct to innocent and useful ob- 
jects, two of the most powerful principles of 
the human breast ; — the love of pleasure and 
the love of action. Hence arose the institution 
of the * gymnastic exercises, which formed the 

* Lycon, according to Pliny, first instituted the 
gymnastic games in Arcadia, whence they were extended 
Ihroughout Greece and successively conlribnted to the 
3 



PafjiHar ^jjor^(s and pxercije:. 059 

principal p^^t '<^^ ^^^ f^^^ solemn i^ames. The 
gymnastic performance 

j^ j^)Q(Jily A's calcul^tc^ fgr defence, 

h^a^^li ^id uijVersion. 'll^qt branch of 
tjiesc ,.^^erci?tis, called the athletic or spor- 
^^^ve, ,,nmst j^^ considered as coeval with 
,j;})e jfjj|i;jTi4tiyii of sj)f:iety .f* The fi ve -f gymnic 
exercises, so accurately described by Homer, 
J^indar, Spphp^l^^, jgmd, Pausaiiias, formed the 
principal bran^h.of the education ofyx>uth. 

7o be enabled to e^cel in the performance 
^^- <]u"^:e, they were trained with the greatest 

^ig;hes( gratifjcalron ofboth t?ie Greeks and. Romans, in 
Ihcir private schools and public solemnities. 

They were performed in ihe Gj/intiasium^ where not 
only youth were in!>tructed in these exercises, but also 
(he philosophers lac^ht Iheir different doctrines. — The 
Pajajrjlra, which . forjned a part of the building, was the 
school for the gymnic exerciser. 

? In almofl every inland of tbe great Pacific Ocean, we 
find a similarity, more or less striking, in the athletic and 
warlike exercises of the natives, witfi those practised in 
Greece.* 

•j These five exercisirs were citJIed Pcnlaihlum by the 
Greeks nnd Quinquertium by the Romans. They con- 
sisted of leaping, rr.pning, throwing the Discus, darting 
the jnvclin, and wrestling ; but inslcjid of darling the 
javelin, others mention b >X'r.g. The last exercise was 
combined wish wrestling; and then took the name of 

Pancratium. See Hieronymus Mcrcurialis, dc arte 

pymnnsiicu — and Pol cr's Archceoloja. 



170 Oji (he Use and Abuse of 

care J and every means was employed to excite 
powerful emulation. Their object was, to 
recreate and strengthen the body, as well as 
fortify and exalt the mind. For, the firm or- 
ganization acquired by perpetual exercise, 
counteracted the propensity to vicious in- 
dulgence, which a voluptuous climate naturally 
inspires. 

They likewise infused a courage depending 
on animal strength and vigour, which was 
excited to the highest pitch among this war- 
like people.* Besides, the ambition of honest 
fame (the sure f reward of excellence in these 
sports and contests) taught them to controul 
the appetites of the body by the affections of 
the soul. 

But the chief aim and end of the institution 
of athletic gymnastics among the more warlike 
states of Greece, were, perfection in the mili- 
tary character. Their philosophers inculcated 
this doctrine by their precepts and example. — 
Plato, in his book of laws, after having viewed 

* Hac arte, Pollux & vagus Hercules 

Innixns, arccsatligit igneas. — Hou. 

*' Thus mounted to the towers above, 

" The vagrant hero, son of Jove.'* 
-j Such as gained victories in any of these game?, 
especlali) liie Olympic, were universally honoured, and 

almost adored. See Plutarch's Sympos. lib. 11. Quest. 

VI. and Potter's Archceol. 



Popida?^ Sports and Exercises, 171 

the high Importance of acquiring bodily force 
and agility, adds, " a well governed common 
wealth, instead of prohibiting the profession 
of the athletic, should, on the contrary, pro- 
pose prizes for all who excel in those exercises, 
which tend to encourage the military art." — 
And, perhaps no better plan could have been 
contrived to foster a warlike spirit amongst a 
people devoted to military enterprize, than the 
training of youth in these hardy and laborious 
exercises, and in proclaiming rewards for those 
who excelled in their public exhibition. If 
man were only destined to conquer and 
triumph over the weaker and less valiant of his 
race — if the lust of dominion were the only 
appetite worthy of gratification, then the cul- 
tivation of bodily prowess and ferocious courage 
would properly form the business, as well as 
pleasure of life. But man has a nobler part to 
act in society ; — and enjoyments more pure, 
lasting, and better fitted to the dignity and 
character of his nature, become necessary to 
his well being in an advanced stage of civiliza- 
tion. — It may readily be conceived, that those 
arts which sooth and embellish human ex- 
istence, and which depend on the cultivation 
of feeling and of taste, would be neglected by 
the Greeks, when only bodily strength, acti- 
vity and address could carry off the palm of 
y2 



172 On ike Use and Abuse of 

victory. 1\\ the distracted state of the first 
settlers In Greece^ wlien the bodily energies 
\vere constantly in action, courage and personal 
strengtli decided the day in most of their mi- 
litary conflicts. Hence courage became asso- 
ciated witli every idea of patriotism, honour, 
and 'virtue. It is the opinion af Aristotle, 
" That the nations, most atteniijve to the 
formation of the body, strive to give it^ tod 
athletic a habit, which iiijiires the beauty of 
the shape, and stints the growth of the person. 
The Lacedemonians avoid this error; yet, by 
imposing ..excessive labour on the body, they 
engender ferocity in the mind, thinking this 
conducive to martial spirit. But mere warlike 
courage, taken "separately by itself, is a doubtful 
and defective quality, and, cultivated loo as- 
siduously by the hardening discipline of toil's 
and struggles, Vv 111 degrade and debase the 
man, blunt his faculties, narrow his soul, and 
render him as bad a soldier as he is a con- 
temptible citizen."* Tliis necessity of rendering 
the gymnastic art subservient to nobler pur- 
suits, was felt and acted upon by the Athe- 
nians, and other polished states of Greece. 

The cultivation of poetry and music was 
encouraged by bcstowiiig the highest honours 

* Giilies's Arislot, pollt. p. Qb(\ 



Popular Sports* and Exercises. l*f^ 

aWd rewards on those V9fid^^(?e!led iirt tli^^s^ 
delightful arts at the celebration of all th6 
pablic games. To such a happy comb iii4t tort 
of mental with corporeal excellencies^, 
cherished and displayed under the mo^ 
pompous and fascinating appearances in thei^f 
popular diversions and solemn festivals, . rhay 
the splendid achievements of this distinguished 
people be attributed.* Considered in the light 
of affording amusement, exciting generous 
emulation, and of creating robust and hardy 
titizens, endowed with energy to resist slavery 

* Monfesqulen is of opinion, that the want df employ- 
ment for the majority of the citizens, compelled the 
Greeks to becorae a society of athletic and military com- 
batants J for, he observes, " they were not peritiiltei to 
follow the ordinary occupations of agriculture, com« 
merce, and the baser arts ; and they were forbidden tp 
thfe idle J coniequenlly, their only resource waftio i|i4; 
gymnastic and mihtary exercises."— ^But this assertion is 
contradicted by the practice of some of the Grecian 
states. We know that in Athens commerce was highly 
esteemed and successfully cultivated. This writer must 
therefore be understood in ia restrictive and qualified 
sense, when he «ays, " li fnnt doiiic regarder Ics Grec«, 
comme une societcd'athletcs Si des combattans." — Moq- 
tesquieu de Pesprit de loix. liv. IV. chap. Vllf. 

The Pancratium, in which the antagonists voluntarily 
threw themselves on the ground, and annoyed each other 
by pinching, biting, scratching and every kind of savage 
attack, ought not to be endured in a civilized country. 



174 On the Use and Abuse of 

at home, and enemies from abroad^ the gym- 
nastic exercises, with some exceptions, and 
under proper regulations, are worthy of the 
admiration and imitation of all free and ci-^ 
vilized states. But there was another kind of 
popular sport, common to the less polished 
states of Greece, and which has been practised 
by mankind, not only in the rude and bar- 
barous, but (to the disgrace of humanity) in 
the most advanced and polished period of 
civilized life. This amusement depended on 
the contests of ferocious animals, whose natural 
antipathies were made use of, and designedly 
enfiamed to gratify a depraved and barbarous 
taste. — " They delight," says Lucian, (speak- 
ing of the Greeks,) " to behold the combats of 
bold and generous animals, and their own 
contentions are still more animated."- — The 
savage ferocity inspired by the frequent re- 
petition of such barbarous exhibitions, accounts 
in some measure for the conduct of the Ephori 
of Sparta, who, when they declared war 
against the Helots, ordered that the young 
bull-dogs should be employed in worrying 
these miserable slaves. To the Greeks may be 
attributed two barbarous diversions which 
have been eagerly adopted by succeeding 
nations. The fighting of cocks, and the di- 
version of bull-fights. The former was first 



Popular Sports and Exercises, 175 

introduced by Themistocles, as a religious fes- 
tival : — it soon degenerated into a sport for 
the gratification of avarice and cruelty. The 
latter had its rise in Thessaly, and was 
afterwards transported to Rome by Julius 
Cicsar.* 

To Greece, Rome was indebted for almost 
every institution of popular sports and bodily 
exercises ; — but the Romans carried them to a 
height of splendour and magnificence un- 
known to their first inventors. The Circus 
and Amphitheatre of Rome, exhibited, on a 
scale proportioned to the immense extent and 
power of the nation, all the popular sports f 
celebrated at Grecian solemnities. In their 
gymnasia, youth were likewise carefully in- 
structed in the gymnic exercises, and likewise 
the athletic combatants trained up for public 
exhibition : — But the barbarous policy of the 
state, or rather the rude and ferocious manners 

* Sec Peggc's Dissertalion on Cock-fighting in 
the ArchoEoIugia — Briltan and Poller's Antiquities of 
Greece. 

f The Lucli circenses, or circensian gTmes, included 
nil the diversions of the rir«:'., viz. — The Pentalhlum,|Or 
Quinquertium, chariot l^yrrhic dance of Ihe 

Gj'eekf, to which were a»idcd sports of Roman origin. — 
The Naumachia« or sea fighN, and bloody combats of 
gladiators, and the contests of ferocious animals with 
each other and with roan. 



,}}r16 On the Use and Abuse of 

.of the people, gaye rise to the alliance of 
.;]^Joody ^hews and combats, with manly sports 
^and exercises. A gloomy and ferocious su- 
2perstition, operating on the minds of a people 
njnpfed, like^h© Romans, to foreign warfare 
and intestine broils, suggested the practice of 
-shedding the blood of captives, as a gratoful 

- sacrifice to the vianes of illustrious warriors. — 
^Tf J>is practice, at first a superstitious rite, be- 

.Q^me ^ ceremony of more pomp and osten- 
tation at the obsequies * of distinguished 

(persons. Hence the origin amongst the Romans 
jofthe profession of a gladiator — and when the 

- people had once acquired a taste for bloody ex- 
hibitions, the detestable spectacle of gla- 
diatorial combats was presented for their 
amusement. 

The progress of cruelty and the danger of 
gratifying barbarous propensities, cannot admit 
of more striking illustration than what is 
afforded by considering the effects of these 
savage exhibitions on the manners and cha- 
racter of the Romans. 

This is not the proper place to discuss the 
question, of Right or Expediency, which man 

* The first shew of gladiators was insliluted by Marcus 
and Decius Brutus, on the death of their father, in the 

year of the city, 490. Sec Kennel's Antiquities of 

Rome. 

3 



Popular Spof^ts and Exrrcises. 177 

!ia$ always claimed of rendering subservient to 
his wanton sports, the lives and feelings of the 
brute creation. It wkii come with more pro- 
priety under discussion in the sequel of these 
observations. — But it may not be improper, at 
present, to animadvert on the consequences of 
rendering bloody scenes familiar and amus- 
ing to even an enlightened people. 

The frequent spectacle of * animals con-* 
flicting with each other in the games of the 
amphitheatre, gradually hardened the public 
mind, and begat a necessity for diversions of a 
more animated and dangerous kind. — Men 
were encouraged, and even compelled to 
enter the lists with wild beasts. At hrst, con- 
demned criminals forfeited their lives in these 
contests. But these were not sufficiently nu- 
merous to gratify the appetite of a degraded 

* In ibe shew of wild beasts exhibited by Julius Caesar 
in his third Consulship, twenty elephanls were opposed 
(o 500 footmen, and 20 more with turrets on (heir 
backs (sixty men being allowed to each turret) engaged 
uilh 600 fool and as many horse. There were three 
torts of these diversions, under the common title of Ve- 
nation. The first, when the people were permitted io 
run after the beaits and catch what they could for their 
own use — the second, when the bea$ts fought with one 
another ; and the third, when they were brought out to 
engage '*'»^li rocn. See Kennel's Roman Anti- 
quities. 

Z 



178 On the Use and Abuse of 

and licentious people. Men* were professedly- 
instructed and regularly hired to sell their 
blood, like gladiators, in these bestial contests. 
Such enormities, great as they are, hide their 
diminished heads, before the supreme wicked- 
ness and cruelty of gladiatorial exhibitions. — 
When the susceptibility to humane and tender 
feelings became almost extinct by the bestial 
encounters, it became necessary to gratify their 
depraved appetites by the exhibition of human 
butchery and sacrifice. So lost to every spark of 
decency and humanity were this infatuated and 
ferocious people, that the highest ranks of so- 
ciety gloried in voluntarily taking a part in 
these encounters : — and even the softer sex, 
throwing aside every trait of amiable modesty 
and timidity, were ambitious of displaying 
their personal courage in these savage contests. 
This conduct did not escape the lash of the 
Roman satyr i St. 

« Cum — Ma^via Tuscumj" 

Figat aprum, & nuda teneat venabula mamma." 
*' Or, when with naked breast the mannish whore, 
*' Shakes the broad spear against the Tuscan boar." 

Persons of every age, sex and condition at- 
tended these barbarous sports. The intoxica- 
tion of the populace, from frequent gratlfica- 

^ These were called Bestiarii. 



Popular Sports and Exercises. 179 

tion, arose to such a pitch, that streams of 
blood flowed annually from several hundreds, 
perhaps thousands, of the wretched gladiators, 
throughout the various cities of the empire.— 
When the people had been so far steeped in 
blood as to prefer beyond any other these 
sanguinary combats, all the candidates for high 
offices bribed their favour, by outvying each* 
other in the number and pomp of these im- 
pious shews. Even the most powerful and en- 
lightened minds among the Romans were 
tainted by the contagious influence of custom 
and the strength of national prejudice : Cicero, 
the humane an^l digniiied statesman and phi- 
losopher, very faintly, if at all, disapproves of 
the excessive fondness of the people for this 
abominable exhibition in his time ; and plainly 
expresses his approbation of the practice as 
antiently conducted. His words are, " crudele 
gladiatorum spectaculum & inhumanum non- 
nuUis videri solet ; & baud scio an ita sit, ut 

* Julius Caesar, in his Edileship, presented three 
huiKifed and iweniy' pair of gladiators — and Trajan, as 
averse from cruelly as (he fonns^r, brought out 1000 pair 
of gladiators enuring a solemnity of 123 daysi — But the. 
sanguinary hero, enlisted 400 senators and 600 knights 
(if there be not a corruption of the text of SueloniuSj 
the historian) as gladiatars, at a celebration of the Oir- 
censian' games. — See Gibbon's History o( the Decline 

and Fall of the Romaa Empire. 

Z 2 



1^80 On th€ list and Abuse of 

nunc fit : cum vero soiiics ferro depugnabant, 
auribus fortassc multa?, oculis quidem nulla 
pGtcrat esse fortior contra dolorem & mortem 
4isciplina." — "The shews of gladiators to some 
persons may seem barbarous and inhuman : 
and I don^t know as the case now stands that 
the censure is unjust : — But when only guilty 
persons were the combatants, the ear might 
rcceive better instruction — it is impossible, 
however, that any lesson to the eye can better 
fortify the mind against the assaults of grief 
and death/* A ridiculous and inhuman as- 
sertion (an eloquent historian exclaims) ad- 
mirably confuted by the bravery of ancient 
Greece and modem Europe. 

-Indeed so little was the practice connected 
with military ardour and true courage, that 
before its establishment the Romans were, 
perhaps, more distinguished for bravery, stea- 
diness of discipline and contempt of death, 
than at any subsequent period of their history. 
It is, however, certain, that in proportion 
to the frequency and extent of these blopi^ly 
exhibitions, did the military valour and dis- 
cipline of the Romans sink into a state of 
degradation and contempt. — " After subsisting 
a period of 600 years" (according to the re- 
mark of Gibbon), " Honorius gave the final 
blow to this inveterate abuse, which d^- 



Popular Sports and Exercises, l«l 

abraded a civilized nntlon below the condition 
«pf savage cannibals. 

Rome justly suffered moral and political 
eviJs from fostering such inhuman propensities: 
Her existence was more than once at stake bjr 
the insurrection of the wretched and despair- 
ing victims of her barbarity. Besides, the 
corruption of the populace, through the me- 
dium of these diversions, was no difhcuit task 
to tlie powerful and wealthy. \Vhen man has' 
been taught to subdue the humane feelings of 
his naturc, he contracts an indifference to the 
purer and nobler virtues whicli fit him for dis- 
charging the duties of a good citizen. Indeed 
every habit that w^ears out the sympathizing 
sensibility of the heart, proportionably disqua- 
lifies man from exercising the pleasing duties 
and tender charities, connected with public 
and domestic life. 

It would appear from this hasty sketch that 
the popular games and exercises of the Greeks 
when coJTvparcd with those of tlie Romans, 
were better calculated to promote the social 
as .well as mdividual welfare of mankind. 
The Grecian sports fortified the body and 
disciplined the mind, whhout injuring the 
one or brutali,zing the other. 

Indeed the superior wisdom of Grecian po- 
lirv rt^ivleif^' ''^^^ public diversions subser- 



182 On the Use and Abuse of 

vient to the interests of the state as well as 
to the happiness of the people. The Roman 
government did not always neglect this branch 
of policy. For, their sports, in the early and 
Tude state of the nation, were adapted to the 
circumstances in which the people were 
placed. But incessantly harassed themselves, 
or employed in harassing others, they had 
neither leisure nor inclination to cultivate those 
arts wliich contribute to liberal amusement : 
Ever occupied with warfare, all their amuse- 
ments had a warlike tendency. The contests 
of savage animals and the conflicts of gla- 
diators, suited alike the ferocious manners of 
the populace and the political views of their 
rulers. When the empire had subdued more 
polished nations, it might have been expect- 
ed, that its amusements would have assumed a 
different spirit and complexion. — But the 
habits of the people were too deeply rooted 
and depraved to be easily changed — And, in- 
deed, so far were their rulers from wishing to 
accomplish this reformation, that from corrupt 
and selfish views, they studiously excited the 
propensities of the people towards degrading 
and inhuman shews, by administering constant 
food for these savage enjoyments. 

In the progress of civilization, since the 
downfal of the Roman empire, great and im- 



Popular Sports and Exercies, 183 

portant changes have taken place in Europe, 
with respect to religious, political and civil 
institutions. The melioration of the condition 
of man in his social and domestic state, and 
the general rehnement of his character and 
manners, have been the happy result of these 
moral and political revolutions. Yet still there 
remain sufhcient vestiges of antient barbarity 
to throw a dark shade on the present state of 
improved civilization. The cruel sports still 
so highly relished in many parts of modern 
Europe, and which bear so near a resemblance 
to the savage contests of the Circus, exhibit 
lasting and disgraceful proofs of the relics of 
antient barbarism. Our own country has been 
but too justly stigmatized, even by her less 
polished neighbours, for the devotion of the 
lower ranks of the people to those amusements 
which are derived from the sufFerins:s of the 
brute creation. 

Although the resemblance (whether it be 
original or imitative is of little importance) 
between the cruel diversions of England and 
of Rome, may be considered a subject of just 
regret ; yet the similarity in some of the manly 
exercises and hardy sports, practised by the 
two nations, cannot but claim our warm and 
just admiration. 

If we have retained more of the barbarous 



184 On the Use and Abuse of 

sports .of antiquity than the rest of Europe, 
there is the merit due to us of having more 
extensively adopted and Jjractised those 
jkmusements and exercises, which inure the 
body to labour and fatigue, and inspire the 
mind with courage and emulation. In treating 
on the general character and spirit of some of 
the sports and exercises of the people of Eng- 
land, it will not be necessary to enter into 
particular detail. It is only proposed to hint 
at those of a popular nature^ and which seem 
to be interwoven with the customs and man- 
ners of the mass of the people. They may be 
comprised under two heads. 

1st. The sports which are 4^rived from the 
animal creation. 

2d. The amusements which depend upon 
bodily exercises and personal contests. 

I. It cannot be denied, that mankind, at 
every period of society and under every diver- 
sity of country and government, have rendered 
the animal race subservient to their wanton and 
cruel sports. But the universality and anti- 
quity of a practice, founded on inhumanity and 
impolicy, are inadequate to sanction its utility 
^nd continuance. If it can be shewn that 
barbarous sports tend to brutalize the human 
character, and are inconsistent with the ma- 
nifest intentions of providetice 3 the argument 



J 



Popular Sports and Exercises, 185 

derived from long custom and authority must 
fall to the ground. There is a sympathy im- 
planted in our natures, which renders us feel- 
ingly alive to the pains and pleasures of our 
fellow-creatures, and is even extended to every 
part of the animal creation. Upon the du? 
exercise of this principle depends great part 

of our social and individual happiness. 

Whatever then has a tendency to "diminish 
the influence of this principle, ought carefully 
Ito be avoided. Now every single act of cruelty 
contributes its share towards the weakening or 
extinguishing the principle of sympathy ; and 
by the repetition of such acts, according to 
the general laws of habit, * a diposition to 
cruelty is likely to be generated. If a child 
be early indulged in sportively tormenting 
animaby and this vicious propensity be suffered 
to grow up into a habit, his sensibility to 
human suffering will be proportionably dimi- 
nished y — insensibility will harden into bruta- 
lity ; and at length he will not be restrained 

* ** The habitude which the people of this country (viz. 
Cape of Good Hope) necessarily acquire in witnessing 
instances of cruelly on human as well as brute creatures, 
cannot fail to produce a tendency to hardness of heart, 
and to stifle feelings of tenderness and benevolence^ 
In fact, the rigour of justice is seldom softened with the 

balm of mercy." Sec Barrow's Travels in Africa, 

Vol. 2. p. 41. 

A a 



186 0)1 the Use and Jbuse of 

from positive acts- of cruelty towards bis owb 
spGcieSy whenever goaded by .the feelings of 
interest or of passion.— Hogarth, our great 
moral painter, has admirably illustrated the 
progress of cruelty in the human breast. The 
first stage of his Hero's career is marked by 
sportive and wanton barbarity to animals.— 
Upon this foundation crimes are soon erected ; 
and at length grown callous to every social* 
and moral feelings he- closes his profligate 
career^ by the perpetration of a deliberate and 
cruel murder. Another excellent judge cf 
'the hufiftan heart, Dr. Moore, has forcibly de- 

^ Such is I he, general impression on the mind of ihe 
V^power of h^bit io generate cruelty,, that in most count ric?, 
those occupations which employ men in the destruction 
of animal life for rhe sustenance of Imiman kind, are held 
ril -degradation and contempt. The lowest of the 
, butchering tribe, in default of an executione/, is com- 
pelled to perform his functions in France and many other 
part> of the -continent. There is an opinion prevailing in 
England, tliat butchers, and even surgeons, are equally 
disqualified, by (he nature of their occupations, to sit upon 
juries,, in triak affecting the lives of their fellxjw-subjects. 
This is probably a popular error ; or, if true, yet a much 
more honourable reason may be assigned, why surgeons 
are not required to act in (he capacity of jurors. Their 
office is to administer to the sufferings and calamities of 
their fellow-creatures — and it is fit they should every 
moment be disengaged and free to obey the summoivs U> 
so humane a duty. 



Popular Sports and Exercises. 1S7 

pictecl the effects of wanton cruelty to the in- 
ferior creationi in the character of Zeluco. — 
The feelings of humanity became stifled in this 
monster's breast, from an early gratification of 
his caprice and passion in importing with the 
torments of the animal race. It is likewise our 
(/?//?/ as 'well as moral advantage — to refrain from 
nil acts of wanton crueltv to the brute creation. 
The organs of sensation in all the. interior ani- 
mals,'. are evidently adapted for receiving and 
transmitting impressions of pairi and pleasure, — 
and although deprived of speech, their groans 
and cries ure intelligibje indications of their 
painful /eelings. Nor are animals less capable 
of expressing signs of pleasure as well as of 
siuffering. This provision for the gratification 
of their several senses, is a sufiicient proof of 
the intentions of the Creator. Like man, they 
were formed to fe^l iind to enjoy. Here rests 
the foundation of their natural right to pro- 
tection and humane treatment frx)ra mankind. 

It cannot be inferred from this mode of rea- 
soning, that animal life should in ever)^ instance^ 
be held sacred. The laws of nature and neces- 
sity demand ^rom us the painful sacrifice. — 
Man must destroy lift? io oider to live. Be- 
sides, wc rau^t consider that; if iTian had sub- 
i^sted only on vegetable food, the majority of 
ihe animal race which furnish his t^ble would 
A a J 



188 On the Use and Abuse of 

never have enjoyed life. Instead of increasing 
the breed of animals, he would have been com- 
pelled to destroy them to prevent a famine. — 
But barbarously, wantonly and deliberately, 
to torture and destroy animal life, is equally re- 
pugnant to humanity, duty and the best in- 
terests of mankind. Experience teaches us, 
that the common sense and feeling of mankind, 
condemn that man whose greatest delight seems 
to consist in bloody and barbarous sports. — • 
Youth, it must be observed, commonly inflict 
pain on animals in mere sport, without a due 
knowledge of the evil they commit. And the 
ignorant populace frequently err from the same 
cause. They are led to consider, but too often, 
from the connivance and even encouragement 
of their superiors in knowledge and station, 
that the animal race are equally indifferent to 
pleasure or pain; and only created for the 
purpose of gratifying the appetite, or contri- 
buting to the diversion of mankind. ' 

If the question be asked, — '' Whether all 
sports derived from animal suffering be entitled, 
to equal condemnation ?" The answer is de- 
cidedly in the negative. — For, although per- 
haps none can be completely justified, yet 
there is still a wide difference in the degree of 
moral and physical evil resulting from their 
^>ractice. That class of diversions pursued for 
3 



Popular Sports and Exercises. 189 

the benefit of health and exercise, where the 
enjoyment of pleasure springs from the exertion 
of our active faculties, must not be compared 
with those depraved and cruel sports, which 
merely consist in the torture and destruction of 
the animal. In the present state of society, 
active diversions become almost necessary to 
the well being of the opulent and sedentary 
classes of mankind. Man cannot be happy 
without occasional active employment. He 
pines in the lap of ease and pleasure, and re* 
quires the stimulus of animated exertion.r^ 
Hunting in all stages of society, has therefore 
formed a principal share of the business and 
pleasure of man. But in this kingdom espe^ 
cially, a considerable portion of its inhabitants 
devote part of their time to the active and vi- 
gorous pursuits of the chace. And although it 
may be urged in favour of this exercise, that it 
invigorates the spirits, teaches men to despise 
enervating pleasure, and inures them patiently 
to sustain hunger, cold and fatigue ; yet it 
cannot be denied, that it has a tendency^ 
when too eagerly pursued, to blunt the sensi- 
bility, — to render the manners rude and coarse, 
and thus to degrade the dignity of the human 
character. The man of enlarged understand- 
ing, liberal notions and elegant manners, may 
occasionally call in the aid of the chace to re- 



1^0 On the Use and- Abuse of j 

lieve the. fatigue of sedentary employment, or 
renovate the powers of nature, exhausted by- 
mental exertion, without mujch apparent in? 
jury to his manners or morals y—hwijrequentl^ 
to take pleasure in that; by which jiiisery t<j 
animals is inflicted, if not absolutely viciotiSi 
is vet of no good tendency; it /conduoes neither 
to form the gentleman nor the man. If it :,bQ 
considered as too nice and, fastidious a delicacy 
to impute blame to the practice of destroying 
animals for the purpose of health, exercise and 
recrealion,' it.may, however, be allowed to call 
hi question the policy- and humanity of other 
diversions, once highly cherished, and still too 
much practised by the people, of this country. 
Some of these national sports are Sanctioned by 
the practice and encouragement of many 
persons distinguished for rank and talents.-— 
That there should be found such abettors pf the 
blood V and barbarous diversions oi^^ock- 
,/igfiiing and bull-haithig, is both a subject, for 
surprize and regret.r— Th^se two amusemen|:^ 
seem to havje survived the destructionpf many 
Other sports equally as unmeaning and barbarous ; 
but that they should not have entirely yielded 
to the improved state of manners — or the inter- 
ference of the laws, is a subject of Jijst re-, 
proach to us by foreigners, and of ^ deserved 
reprobation by the humane and reflectitig of 



Popular Sports duel Exercim. \^\ 

our own countrynlen.- The reciprocal in- 
fluence of sports and manners on each other, 
may be, shewn from these and similar; diver- 
sions, as practised ia various periods of our 
history. A I^te ingenious and laborious writer* 
has described the ancient and modern diver- 
sions of the people of Great Britain, from the 
earliest 5iuthentic records tp the present time. — 
This picture confirms, t]^. general truth of the 
position: — That;va&r.i^ j^ation improycs.^ia 
manners and citviUzatiQEV, it loses its high relish 
for inlniman and ferocious diversions^ It is 
more than probable, tjiaf the sports derived 
from animal , contests, rrsuch as bu^Ubjiiting, 
bear-baiting, and cock-fighting, are vestiges 
of Roman amusements' 'introduced by that 
people ^nto this cojuquered island. It is jat least 
certaiQj 4h9y..'yv(?je,pi;ftgtise;d %,i% thj^^, parly 

* Sec'StruliV Diversion* aod Pastimes of.4h^,C^plc of 

England. . ; , «. : .^.^.iH --.'a ::) r :;.,£„ v,]:^ ,. [ 

t The Jongleuri' or Joggleri^ in ihe reign, of Heary 
the 2(1 made a profession uf (raitiuig buiU, b^ai'S^ and 
even /i07««, for ihe purpose <>/ baiting ihem wiih-ciogs. — 
The sport of fiohling cods in pitcl*ed batllej^ first ap- 
pears on record in lh« same reign. Dariug sub.cqiicnt 
reigns thiy sport became gencr^alj and, to the disgrace of 
our country, was countenanced by royal fsvonr durirvg 
James the Island Charles the 2nd'$ reign. If the Romans 
set us the example in devising these sports, it mutt be 
confessed, we have ** bettered liie inslruciion.*' f9r 



192 On the Use and Abuse of-,^ 

period of our history. During the military 
enthusiasm of the middle ages, while jousts 
and tournaments furnished amusement to the 
nobility and gentry, martial exercises consti- 
tuted the chief diversions of the body of the 
people. Hence arose the ^establishment of 
schools for teaching the " Noble science of 
defence,'* as it was called. These laid the 
foundation for professed gladiators, or prize- 
fighters. — The great prevalence of murder, 
robbirig and every species i3f barbarity, ia 
consequence of these proceedings, during the 
reign of Edward the First, compelled the go- 
vernment to issue an edict to suppr€ss the 

10 English refinement and ingenuity may be ascribed (he 
noble invention of the Gaffle or Spur ; by the aid of 
which, the gallant combatants of the cockpit mangle, 
torture and destroy each other ; no doubt to the great 
satisfaction and delight of admiring spectators. Another 
instance of our barbarous ingenuity must not be omitted. 
No other nation but the British has contrived to put in 
practice the Battle- Royals and the Welsh-Main. — In the 
former, the spectator may be gratified with the display of 
numbers of game-cocks, destroying each other at the 
same moment without order or drstinction. In the latter, 
these courageous birds are doomed to destruction in a 
more regular, but not less certain manner. They fight 
in pairs, (suppose 16 in number) and the two last sur- 
vivors are then matched against each other ; so that out 
of 32 birds, 31 must be necessarily slaughtered.— See 
Pcgge's Essay in the Arihoeologia Britanmcii, 



Popular Sports anil Exercises, ^X92 

schools as well as the combats of prize- 
fighters. 

During the reigti of Henry the Seventh and 
Henry Eighth, these schooJs were revived in 
consequence of a supj)ased degeneracy in the 
ruilitary spirit of the people ; and the baiting 
of animals at the same time became a fa- 
vourite * diversion. 

The Bear-garden,f during the 16th and the 
early part of the 17th century, was the place 
of rendezvous for the highest as well as the 
lowest classes of society, llie Tatler, when 
treating on the barbarous sports of this na- 
tional circus, and the comments of foreigners 
on the subject, adds, " I wish I kn«w how 
to answer the reproaches which arc cast upon 
us, and to excuse the death of so many inno- 

* Stephen Gossen, in the latter end of Henry 8ih*s reign, 
considers that our ancestors had entirely sunk into the lap 
of effeminacy, a* may be proved by the following singu- 
larly quaint and alliterative style of abuse. " Ouf 
wrestling at arms is turned into wallowing in ladies' laps ; 
our courage to cowardice ; our running to riot ; our 
bow«, into bowls ; and our dart* into dibhes." 

f Another common diversion, during the period of 
Queen Elizabeth and in the two following reigns con- 
sisted in several persons at the same time scourging with 
whips a blind -foMeil bear round the ring, whose suffer- 
ing< and awkward attempt^ at revenge highly graiified 
the noble, as well as ignoble spcctalori, 
Bb 



1<>4 On the Use and Abuse of 

cent cooks, dogs, bulls and bears, as have becrt 
set together by the ears, and died an untimely 
death only to create us sport." Bull-baiting 
was not confined within the limits of a bear- 
garden, but was universally practised, on va- 
rious occasions, in all the towns and villages 
throughout the kingdom. In many places the 
practice was sanctioned by law, and the bull- 
rings affixed to large stones driven into the 
earth remain to this day, as memorials of this 
legalized species of barbarity. The regular 
system of bull-baiting seems to have comr- 
menced with the reign, of King John. Its 
general prevalence since that period, until 
within a few years, must have produced im- 
portant effects on! the manners and character of 
the people. .The misery it has inflicted on the 
harmless and inoffensive brute, is a matter of 
no small regret and indignation with the hu- 
mane and considerate part of mankind ; — but 
the injury done to public morals and social 
happiness, by an attachment to this degrading 
pastime is still more to be deplored. Numbers 
of bulls were, and still continue to be, regu- 
larly trained and carried about from village to 
village, to enter the lists against dogs bred up 
for the purpose of the combat. To detail all 
the barbarities committed in these encounters 
would be a disgusting and tedious task. All 



Popular Spor/s ajid Exerciyes. 195 

the bad passions which spring up in ignorant 
and depraved minds arc here sret afioat. The 
torments and blood of the suffering beast are 
purchased by money of his unfeeling master ; 
and the owners of the dogs are not more gra- 
tified in gaining their sanguinary wagers, than 
in applauding the savage ferocity displayed by 
these animals. We cannot often appeal to the 
annals of bull-baiting ; — but if they were regu- 
larly laid open, it is probable that many in- 
stances of a similar kind to the following might 
be held up as a lessoii to the abettors of such 
diversions. — * •" Some years ago at a bull- 
baiting in the North, a young man, confident 
of the courage of his dog, laid some trifling 
wager, :that he would at separate times cut off 
all the four feet of his dog, and that after every 
amputation he would attack the bull. The 
cruel experiment was tried, and with success." 
Such detestable barbarity can only be exceeded 
by the following recital extracted from the 
public prints of 1799. At a bull-baiting in 
Staffordshire, after the animal had been baited 
by single dogs, he was attacked by numbers let 
loose at at once upon him. — Having escaped 
from his tormentors, they again fastened him 
to the ring ; and with a view, either of gra- 

*:Se6( B«wick\ Quadruped^. — i^rlicle Dog., 
Bb 2 



156 On the Use and Abuse q; 

tifying their savage revenge, or of better se- 
curing their victim, they actually cut off his 
hoofs, and enjoyed the spectacle of his being 
worried to death on his bloody and mangled 
stumps. These facts speak more than a 
volume against the sophistic arguments of the 
advocates for exciting brave and manly 
courage by the exhibition of bloody and bar- 
barous sports. 

Although persons of rank and education, at 
the present period, have abandoned bear and 
l>ull-baiting to the lowest and most despicable 
part of the populace ; and even amongst them 
these sports are much less frequent than for- 
merly j yet the practice meets with coun- 
tenance in some parts of the kingdom, and has 
been supported not long since, in one of 
the first assemblies of this- nation, extolled 
by mjen of rank and abilities, as encouraging 
harmless amusement, manly spirit and con- 
tempt of danger. 

These opinions appear to be so much at 
variance with the present enlightened, liberal 
and humane state of society, that to hear they 
have been defended by serious arguments and 
with ^ persevering ardor, is suiircient to excite 
bol^; regret and astonishment. Cruelty in 
every shape is unjustifiable; — but wanton, 
deliberate barbaritv is dishonourable to our 



Popular Sports and P^.itrcises. 197 

nature, and contrary to the , principles of na- 
tural religion, honour, justice and humanity. 
Of all tl e cruel sports, hull-baiting, as gene^' 
rally practised, is, perhaps, the least defensible. 
It is not only a cruel, but a foolish and detests 
able diversion. That the spectacle of two 
animals endowed with courage, strength and 
activity, exerting their antipathies to each 
others destruction, upon fair and equal terras, 
should excite our curiosity and animate onr 
feelings, is reconcileable to the constitution 
and nature of man ; but that any human being 
should delight in beholding a noble and useful 
animal tied to a stake, and deprived in a great 
measure of the means of offence and defence, 
and then worried and tormented by dogs and 
men, is a sport so insipid, so unsportsman-like,* 

^ Throwing at cocks is another specimen of unmean- 
ing brutality confined solely to our own country. After 
\icing fanniliarized to the barbarous destruction of rlii» 
ourageous bird in the cock-pit, it was only advaneinf^ 
•ve step further in the progress of crueller, (o fasten this 
mo.t gallant animal to a stake, in order to murder him 

piece-raeal. This detestable barbarity has declined 

M oir manners have becooie more polished and humane; 
but the strong hand of tkit law was obliged (o interfere iti^ 
many places to hasten its abolition. The cruel irea^ 
inent of the animal face might well lead an ingenious -f*^ 

f Wenderborn, on t\ie character and manners of th<r 
peupl« of Great Brittinv 



198 On the Use ajid Abuse of 

and so cruel, as to excite wonder as well as 
detestation. But the advocates of these and 
similar cruel diversions, exclaim in a tone of 

triumphant interrogation " Do not these 

sports inspire manly courage and contempt of 
danger ?" — Certainly not. They are only cal- 
culated to generate cruelty and a thirst for 
blood. They may, indeed, inspire ferocity and 
insensibility to danger, but they are unfit to 
impart genuine and manly fortitude. 

The Romans indulged, as before remarked, 
in these savage diversions to a greater extent 
than any other nation of antiquity ; yet they did 
not excel the Greeks, nor have surpassed the. 
moderns, in the display of military ardour and 
true courage. 

It is a superficial and unphilosophical view 
of the subject, to consider the barbarous sports 
of Rome contributing to the establishment of 
her power and military fame. These spectacles 
never became common till after Hannibars. 
defeat; and that the Romans, subsequent to 

foreigner lo remark, when describing our popular di- 
version, as follbws.— " The women of Rome beheld bar- 
barities and murders in cold blood ; but the bcxing- 
matches — the bull-bai(ings, cock fightings, and tie nii* 
merous attendance of both sexes at public executions, 
indicate that there is at least a remnant of llouFvan 
manners, and the taste of those tinjes, left in,Eng!&iid," , \ 



Popular Sports and Excr0ises, 199 

this period improved in valour and hardihood, 
is not recorded in the pages of 'their history. 
But may we not, with just ]f)r&ie, appeal to 
facts furnished by our own age and country ? 
Has the valour, enterprize, or intrepidity of 
British soldiers and sailors shone less^eons])!- 
cuous, since the period that bull-baiting and 
other barbarous sports have declined, through- 
out most parts of the kingdom ? I'he answer 
is recorded in the history of our late naval and 
military transactions. 

The conduct of the Spaniards and- Portu- 
gueze, when contrasted with that of our own 
countr}'men, is a striking proof of the incom- 
petency of savage and cruel amusements to 
create a courageous and warlike disposition. — 
Bull-fights still constitute the only active po- 
pular amusement of the two countries.— If 
these bloody sports were capable of inspiring 
active courage and manly fortitude, how arc 
we to account for the acknowledofcd dcire- 
neracy of the people of Spain arid Portugal in 
these warlike qualities } 

The advocates for bull-baiting and similar 
sports, have recourse to another argument, or 
rather assertion, which they urge with great 
confidence : *' Cruel sports," they contend, 
*' do not necessarily generate cruelty in a 
people.'* " The English, (say they) who arc 
•3 



200 On the Use a?id Abuse of 

fond of these diversions, are, ^t the same tim<?, 
Jess ferocious,! and indeed hold the shedding of 
hunoan blood more in abhorrence than any 
othernation on the face of the globe.'* Granted 
that we really deserve this honourable distinc- 
tion — ^Does it follow that human nature is dif- 
ferently constituted in England to what it is in 
Other parts of the world ? Can it be necessary 
to prove, that habits of indifference to human 
suffering are acquired by repeated acts of cru- 
elty to brutes ; and that the sympathy of our 
natures must be blunted in proportion to our 
familiarity with scenes of unnecessary and 
wanton barbarity ? These are almost self- 
evident suppositions ; at least they are such in- 
ductions from daily and repeated experience, 
as to pass current for intuitive truths.— But if 
w€ admit that the English are more addicted 
to cruel sports, and yet hold human life more 
sacred than the people of other countries, it by 
no means follows, that such sports have not a 
tendency to create a disposition to cruelty. — 
How then are we to reconcile this apparent ^ 
contradiction? The paradox, if there really 
be any, is not difficult of solution, 

The life of man is always most respected, 
where it is of mOvSt consequence. For, in .a 
country like Britain, where the whole body of 
the people enjoy political and civil rights, their 



popular Spbr It and Extrdses. ^OJ 

own importance, and that of their fcHawr 
citizens will be felt and esteemed ; and wlKre 
just an(i equal laws protect the life and; pro- 
perty of the meanest, of the people,; and 
consequently private injuries caa'be r:^dfes6ed 
by an appeal to the tribunals of justice, .maa 
will be less disposed to be the, avctiger of his 
own wrongs. — Besides, ignorance .\i> coni- 
monly the parent of cruelty. Now. it may be 
safely asserted,, that the inowledgie of fnin's 
duties both towards .his neighbour an(jijii> 
Creator, are better understood and morewi^e^y 
diffused amongst the mass of the people ;ift 
this kingdom, than in those otherwise ci- 
vilized countries, where a jthirst for the blood 
of their fellow-creatures seems chieHy to- pre- 
vail. These eminent moral and political ad- 
vantages are tne powerful counteracting causes 
of that spirit of barbarism which cruel diversions 
are calculated to excite. If it be desirable then 
to efface the harsh lineaments of rudeness, and ^ 
want of feeling nearly allied to brutajity, 
which ^till mar the otherwise fair visage of 
thp national character, let all barbarous diver- 
sions be entirely .>lished ; but especially let 
the sport, of buli-b*iitii,ig.be the first, offering to 
be sacrificed at the shrines of humanity and 
justice ! "A diversion,** fo speak of it in the 
c c 



202 On the Use and Jouse of ' 

language of a justly celebrated * orator, 
'Vwhich may be characterised as inhuman, 
cruel, disgraceful and beastly, and which can 
excite nothing but brutality, ferociousness and 
cowardice: For, its direct tendency is to debase 
the mind, deaden the feelings, and extinguish 
every spark of benevolence." 

H. The amusements which depend on bo- 
dily exercises and personal contests. 

It is not compatible with the limits of this 
essay to notice the variety of bodily exercises 
and active sports to which the people of 
England are generally addicted. — But there is 
one kind of personal contest, to the considera- 
tion of which the remaining part of these 
remarks will be chiefly devoted, as it has 
been the source of obloquy and reprobation 
among foreigners, to the national character. 
The public exhibition of boxing, and the 
practice of the same art in deciding private 
and personal quarrels, are here alluded to. 

The exhibition of pugilism on a public stage^ 
is most probably a relic of one species of the 
Roman gymnastic. This mode of venal stage- 
fighting is a barbarous prostitution of a manly 
and useful art, whether considered as an ex- 

* Sheridan : — Parliamentary Dsb^itcs on the Abolirign 
of 3ull-baiting, &c. 



Popular Sperts and Exercists. 203 

crclse calculated to inspire fortitacle and intrc- 
pidity, or to afford efficacious means of defence 
against personal insult and violence. But when 
considered merely in the liglit of yielding gra- 
tification as a public spectacle, or of furnishing 
an opportunity for gambling speculations, it is 
then viewed in all its naked deformity — Yet, is 
not the art of boxing, by which instantaneous 
insult may be avenged, or personal, injury 
averted, less dangerous than any other practice 
adopted by the inhabitants of the continent on 
similar occasions and for similar purposes ? — 
The question is an important one ; and the 
followins: facts and observations mav serve, 
perhaps, to apologize for, if they cannot justify, 
a custom so interwoven with our national 
manners and character. 

So long as man is subject to the imperfec- 
tion of his nature, he must be compelled to 
acquire the art of self-defence, as well as that 
of annoyance to others. Our experience of 
his conduct and character, teaches us the im- 
possibility of extinguishing the passions of^ 
pride and resentment, which, although they 
frequently involve him in misery, are still the 
sources of some of his noblest qualities and 
attributes. — As some portion of evil will attach 
to the best and wisests>'^tem of moral or civil 
restraint ; that policy is, perhaps, the \\ isest, 
c c 2 



^04 On the Use and Abuse df 

which legislates for man as he is, not altogether 
as he ought to be. — ^Suffer the passions to" reign 
iincontrouled, and you dissolve the bonds of 
society : stifle the active energies of a resolute 
independent spirit, and you degrade the man 
into a passive slave. The feeling of resentment 
for. unprovoked injliry and insult is a salutary, 
if not -instinctive provision of our common 
nature. ' It may be asked-—" Is man then to 
be the judge and avenger of his ov^n wrongs ? 
Is .not: every offence against the person of a 
citizen a breach of the " laws of society ? and 
should it not be punished as such r" Cer- 
tainly r-i^But if in the best regulated states, it 
be found impracticable to prevent man from 
frequently- asserting a claim to the vindication 
of his own real or supposed wrongs, it then 
becomes a question of expediency as to the most 
preferable mode by w^hich he may be enabled 
-to obtain this end. Boxing may not unjustly 
be considered as the most eligible means of 
offence and defence. It is properly ranked 
among those athletic exercises, which, at the 
same time that they impart address and 
strength to the body, inspire courage and for- 
titude in the mind. It may indeed lead bad 
hearts and bad heads into acts of presumption 
.and petty tyranny ; Mt this propensity to an 
improper- Exertion of skill and courage would 



Popular Sports and ExemOes, fi05 

be checked, in proportion as men were more 
^^//a////' possessed ot the means of defence or 
aggression. — They would learn to resptxt the 
skill and bravery of each other, and conse- 
quently l^e less prone to'^ndue resentment and 
quarrels. The government that ^vould at- 
tempt, with a despotic and sevxre authority, 
to controul the exertions of self-confidence, 
and a moderate exercise of just resentment, 
could only expect to rule over a natiomTjf 
timid and revengeful slaves. The open axid 
ingenuous expression of manly indignation 
might be repressed ; but the rancorous feelings 
of malignant revenge, would be fostered, and 
encouraged. But no . state can, with any 
prospect of success, attempt such an absolute 
dominion over the passions of men. And if it 
did, " it must (according to the observation of 
a spirited author) in order to act consistently, 
prohibit the use of knives, hatchets, and even 
pokers ; for any of these, upon a sudden emer- 
gency, might impart a fearful power to the 
enraged and the feeble." 

If we consider the practice of other countries, 
where boxing is unknown, we shall find, that 
the modes of resenting injuries, resorted to by 
the common people, are full of danger and fe- 



206 On the Ufe and Abuse of ' 

rocity. In * Italy, the stiletto is not only the 
weapon of the hired assassin, but is abo kept 
ready in the bosom of the respectable citizen, 
to be plunged into the heart of his friend or 
neighbour, upon any sudden provocation from 
anger, or motive of revenge. 

AVhen the passions are under greater re- 
straint, from the hifluence of laws, of climate 
and of custom, such dreadful consequences do 
not ensue from the quarrels of the populace. f 
Yet even in France, and most parts of Ger- 
many, the quarrels of the people are deter- 
mined by a brutal appeal to force, directed in 

* In an authentic publication of ilie fife of the lafe 
Pope, it is affirmed, (hat upwards of 1000 person*; 
annually fall victims in Rome to the stiletto ; either by 
the hands of the hired assassin, or in private quarrels* 
Dr. Moore reckons the nuniber of murders in Naples 
by the dagger, at not less than 400 annually. 

f The mode of fighting in Holland, among the seamen 
and others, is well known by the appellation of Snickcr- 
Snee. In this contest sharp knives are used ; and the 
parties frequently maim, and sometimes, destroy each 
other. — The government deems it necessary to tolerate 
this savage practice — Certain fines arc imposed if wounds 
be inflicted on dangerous parts of the body; but a very 
trifling, and indeed seldom any punishment ensues, pro- 
vided the general rules of the combat have been ad- 
hered to. 



Popular Sportf and Exercises. 507 

iiny manner, however perilous, to the annoy- 
ance or destruction of an adversary. Sticks, 
stones and every dangerous kind of weapon, 
are resorted to for the gratification of passion 
or revenge. But the most common and savage 
method of settiling quarrels upon the continent 
is the Jldoption of the Pancratium. The 
parties close, and struggle to throw each other 
down ; at the same time the teeth and nails are 
not unemployed. In short, they tear * each 
other like wild beasts, and never desist from 
the contlict till their strength is completely 
exhausted; and thus regardless of any esta* 
blished laws of honour which teach forbearance 
to a prostrate foe, their cruelty is only termi- 
nated by their inability to inflict more mischief. 
And yet superficial observers, and especially all 
foreigners who have written concerning our 
customs and manners, loudly brand the English 

? In Virginia and Ihe ot^er southern states of Arae* 
rica, the mo«t savage acts of barbarity are committed, in 
the quarrels of the people. Couching — or thrusting out 
the e)C from the socket, is one of the means resorted to 
upon almost every personal dispute. An intelligent 
traveller, Mr. Weld, declares, that at Richmond in 
Virginia, it was nothing uncommon io meet with persons 
deprived of one or both eyes from this horrid praciice.— 
He mentions another mode to disable an antagonisf, *o 
detestably barbarous, as to excite incredulity, if the ac- 
count bad not been cprroboraled by other writers. 



*208 . On the JJs^ and Abus^, of^^<\ 

<tharacter' with savage rudeness and brutality, 
because they : have seen men terminate their 
quarrels by an appeal to boxing ; — ^in which 
the parties are not permitted to take an unfair 
advantage of each other, but when one is dis- 
posed to yield, the combat immediately closes, 
and the conqueror and the vanquished are often 
geen to give and receive a hearty shake of the 
hand, in token of mutual good will and for- 
giveness. . In no instance does the manly, 
spirited and generous character of Britons, 
rise to a higher pitch, than in this alacrity 
almost universally shewn by the most ingprant 
and lowest order of the people, tp. terminate 
their personal contests, in a kindly and ho- 
nourable manner. — The mind indeed is thus 
relieved at once from the brooding mischief of 
malice and revenge. Foj, when the idea of self- 
consequence has been maintained,, in. courage- 
ously supporting the contest, man is better 
satisfied with himself "and others, and cohse- 
quently more likely to dismiss his ill-will and 
resentments. — In order to foster manly fortitude 
and vigour, and to prevent the mischiefs arising 
from the irregular and brutal exertions ; of 
strength and ferocity — would it not be advisa- 
ble to encourage the art of boxing with 
ipuffler^,^^sa subordinate branch ofthegynv 
nastic csoercises ? All stage exhibitions of 

i 



Popular Sports and Exercises. 209 

prize-f^ktiirg ought to be rigidly prohibited ; 
nor should men ever be sufTered to prostitute 
their strength and valour for the sordid purpose 
of gain. 

^*It IS a singular though striking fact, that in 
those parts of the kingdom where the ge- 
nerous and manly system of pugilism is least 
practised, and where, for the most part, all 
personal disputes are decided by the exertion 
of savage strength and ferocity — a fondness for 
barbarous and bloody sports is found to prevail; 
In some parts of Lancashire bull-btutijig and 
^lan-slmiiiig are common practices. The know- 
ledge of pugilism as an art is, in these places, 
neither understood nor practised. There is no 
established rule of honour to save the weak 
from the strong, but every man's life is at the 
mercy of his successful antagonist. The object 
of each combatant in these disgraceful con- 
tests, is, to throw each other prostrate on the 
ground, and then with hands and feet, teeth 
and nails, to inflict, at random, every possible 
degree of injury and * torment. — This is not 

? A disgusting instance of this ferocious mode ofde- 
ciding quarrels, was not long since brought forward at the 
Manchester sessions. — It appeared in evidence, that two 
persons, upon some trifling dispute, at a public hou<e, 
agreed to lock themselves up in a room with the landlord 
and '* fii;ht it out'* according to the Bohon method. — 
This contest lasted a long time, and was only tefbinated 
D d 



210 On the Use and Abuse of 

an exaggerated statement of the barbarism still 
prevailing in many parts of this kingdom. — 
The county assizes for Lancashire afford too 
many convincing proofs of the increasing mis- 
chiefs arising from these savage and disgraceful 
combats. 

The Judges, on these occasions, have fre^ 
quently declared in the most solemn and im- 
pressive charges to the Grand Jury, that the 
number of persons indicted for murder, or 
manslaughter, In consequence of the bestial 
mode of fighting practised in this county, far 
exceeded that of the whole Northern f cirt 
cuit ', — and that, in future, they were deter- 
mined to punish with the utmost rigour of the 

by the loss, of the greatest pari of the nose and a part of an 
ear, belonging to one of the parties, which were acfually 
bitten oflf by the other, during the fight. — The sufferer 
exhibited at the trial, part of the ear so torn off; and 
when asked by the counsel, what bad become of that 
part oi his nose which was mis&ing— he replied — with 
perfect naivete^—" That he believed his antagonist had 
swallowed it ! !'* It has happened to the writer of these 
remarks to witness, in more than one instance, the pick- 
ing up in the streets, lacerated portions of ears and 
fingers a^'cf these detestable and savage broils. Surely 
either our laws or mannersi might interfere io sup- 
pressing such deeds of savage barbarity ! 

f At one assizes, no less than nine persons were con- 
victed of manslaughter, originating fiom these disgraceful 
encounters. 



Popular Sports and Exercises. 2 1 1 

law, offenders of this description — But, alas ! 
these just denunciations have little availed. — 
Is it not then highly probable, that the evil 
which the severity of the law has been unable 
to correct, might be gradually and effectually 
abolished, or at least greatly mitigated, by 
the encouragement of a more manly, and less 
dangerous mode of terminating the quarrels 
of the populace ? — In the Southern parts of 
this kingtlom very rarely (and then chiefly in 
pitched battles for gain) is there any danger to 
life or limb from the practice of fair boxing. — 
If then in the public schools and large manu- 
factories of Lancashire, where immense num- 
bers of boys are under the entire controul of 
their masters and employers, some pains were 
taken to introduce the manly system of boxing, 
and the laws of honour, by which it is regu- 
lated, there can scarcely be room to doubt, 
but that the life of man would be more re- 
spected — barbarous propensities subdued, and 
the present character of the county rescued 
from the stigma of savage rudeness. It has 
been asserted, by those qualified to judge, 
that since the laie diffusion of the knowledge 
of the pugilistic art by itinerant practitioners 
among the Northe'rn inhabitants of this king- 
dom, the mere exertions of brutal strength and 
ferocity have somewhat fallen into disu$e, 
Dd2 ? 



212 On the Use and Abtise of^ &c. 

both as exercises of pastime, as well as means 
of offense and defence. In order therefore to 
abolish all traces of the savage mode of con- 
^test which has been 50 fully described, would 
it not be advisable to hold forth prizes, at wakes 
and public amusements, (where the populace 
assemble chiefly for the purpose of diversion 
and pastime) for the encouragement of those, 
who excelled in sparring with mufflers ? — 
This trial of skill, force and agility (which 
was at first tihe practice pf the antients) would 
contribute j tnider due regulatwTis, to invi- 
gorate the body and animate the courage; and 
effectually abolish the present dangerous and 
inhuman mediod of deciding personal contents 



{ 213 } 



REVERIE; 

OOKSIDEUED AS CONNECTED WITH LITERATURE. 

AN ESSAY. 

Ry ihe Rev. JOHNSON GJ8-ANX, A. B. 

of St. John's College," Oxon. 
(Read June £S> iSoz.) 

It is a frequent process, and often one of the 
highest pleasures of the mind, to become in- 
sensible to the pursuits in which it is more 
immediately engaged, and yielding to iinpres- 
sions which lead to more interesting trains of 
ideas, to suffer itself to be carried by them to 
an imaginary contemplation of distant scenes, 
or speaking over of former conversations^ — ^to 
a recollection of past transactions or anticipa- 
tion of future enjoyments. This mental ob- 
servation is known by the name of Reverie : 
and is also expressed in common conversation 
by the emphatical metaphor — absence of 
mind. 
Without entering into the question how far 



214 Reverie y consider sd as 

volition is concerned ; whether the mind is 
active or passive in a state of reverie, it will 
not be improper, for the sake of imparting 
clearer ideas on the subject, to draw a parallel 
betwixt reverie and abstraction, according to 
the common acceptation of the terms. — Ab- 
straction is the act of attending closely to the 
object of study, which is present to us : — 
Reverie is the state of being drawn away from 
an observance of that object, by other reflec- 
tions. The one indicates strength j the other 
a degree of weakness of mind : — abstraction 
is an effort to collect our thoughts : reverie 
consists in their being let loose, to wander 
whithersoever they will. — Abstraction is a 
steady and continued act of pondering on the 
object before us. Reverie, as it is to be con- 
sidered in this paper, consists in a want of the 
power of abstraction. 

Abstraction resists the impulses of external 
objects, which have a tendency to disturb the 
train of ideas in study. Reverie surrenders the 
mind to these impulses, and to the new train 
of ideas, (foreign to the immediate subject of 
contemplation) which they introduce. Ab- 
straction is peculiar to the philosopher; — 
reverie to persons of sensibility and genius, un 
corrected by strength of ,,mind.-^ Abstraction 



connected with Literature, 215 

is the habit of the diligent. Reverie, the trifling 
of the idle* 

Every man is conscious that his mind is 
often imperceptibly conveyed away from the 
objects that are presented to his senses, and 
led to other catenations of ideas. Among 
these it ranges for some time, till at length, in 
a manner apparently inexplicable, it perceives 
itself brought back to its immediate employ- ' 
ment; but is equally at a loss to explain how it 

* It may, in some ca^cs at first seem doubtful, 
whether to refer certain operation!* of the mind to the 
former or the latter of these terms. Poetry is one ex- 
ample — But a little reflection will solve the difficulty. 
Some of the poets' finest ideas may be derived from 
reverie ; — but to embody them in uords, to give them 
a local habitation and a name, close abstraction is cer- 
tainly required. 

It may^ also, be proper to observe, that there are two 
distinct species of reverie ; each of which interrupts 
study. The one i<= unconnected with the object of 
our study, and is occasioned by a strong impression on 
our mind, which dib'urbs the power of attending to 
another subject : as if after witnessing an execution, I 
should attempt to read a book of philosophy, the horrid 
spectacle would in this case intrude upon my thoughts, 
and render attention impossible. The other species 
arises from the subject, and is frequently produced when 
the mind is at ease. Cato's Soliloquy on reading 
Plato's Treatise on the Soul's Immortality, may be sup- 
posed to be an example of it ; — and this species of 
reverie may easily be confounded with abstraction. 

Q 



2^1^ Beverie, considered as 

broke loose, how long it has been absent, or 
what has occasioned its return. 

Physicians, who have treated this mental in- 
firmity as a disease, have confined themselves 
to a description of the constitutional frame, 
-frhlch renders us liable to it.* Having omitted 

* I>r. Darwen, vol. 1. p. 361. says (hat " people with 
ancfeased sensibility, who may be known by high co- 
loured lips, dark hair, and large eyes, are most liable to 
enthusiasm, delirium and reverie. In this last aB'ection, 
they are seen to start at the clapping of a door, because 
the more intent any one is on the passing current of his 
ideas, the more is he surprized at their being dissevered 
by external violence. But owing to the great expendi- 
ture of sensorial power on these sensitive motions, it 
follows, that there will be a deficiency of it in the irritative, 
which will be performed with le^s energy. 

Hence these persons do not attend to slight stimulus: 
but when a stimulus is great enough to excite sensa- 
tion, it excites greater sensitive actions than in other 
constitutions. This is the case in delirium or inflamma* 
tjon. — Thus persons addicted to reverie are absent in 
company; — sit or lie long in one posture, and in winter 
have the skin of their legs burnt in various colours by the 
fire. They are fearful of pair. ; covet music and sleep; — 
and delight in poetry and romance.*' As the motions 
excited in consequence of encreased sensation, are more 
than natural, and thus expend a greater portion of sen- 
sorial power, the voluntary motions, like the irritative, 
are less easily exerted. — Hence the persons we have been 
describing are indolent with regard to all voluntary ex- 
ertions, whether of mind or body. They are alsb known 



to' anaKz^ the method, by whicli mind and 
body act and rc-act on each other, they have 
failed to trace the dUease to its source ; &nd in 
point of jepiedy, i haive left -it^wher^t^^th^ 
found it. 

In the course of reading or reflection, the 
subject which engages us may be a task, or a 
pleasures it may either be indifrereilt to us, or 
deeply interesting, If ^libe of; the latter der 
scription, (or even iWith^ c^Sfi^j^f the former, 
if we;- happen to postos a strength rof mind) 
attention will be collected from every quarter, 
.where it may usually be dissipated, and gathered 
to this single focus. . It seem^ to leave the 
organs of sense;— :whicb, hence, bejcoine callous 
to impressions, at other. times forcibly percepti- 
We* ;A bell may toll, atid the hail may rattle 
on-i.their windows; but both mgy be alike 
unheard. To this stateof the mind, philosophy 
gives the name of abstraction.— If; on the con- 
trary, l have a more favourite study,, than that 
in wiiich I am engaged ; or if, when I am en^ 
gaged in study, there be some pleasure whicli 
I expect or have lately enjoyed 5. or some mis. 
fortune which I iipprehend, or h.i\^e lately siis- 

anci interr'jptiiig others in (iiscoufse wim irrelevant ob- 
scrvallons. Deaf people adhere longer than bttiers to one 
mbject, as thc^r train bf-'KJefH ^re in-no<!irngH''ft'<iWi 6M 
infelof disiiirbance. 



218 Reverie, considered as 

tained, dwelling upon my mind; I shall find 
it difficult to fix my attention — my thoughts 
will be perpetually recurring to this more in- 
teresting subject; my inclination to wander, 
and my desire to improve will carry on an 
equal contest ; and I shall discover, or^ laying 
aside my book, that I have been reading one 
thing, and pondering on another. This double 
operation of the mind, constitutes that species 
of re\ erie which is peculiar to literary persons; 
Our train of thought is disturbed, when any 
of our senses is acted upon by some quality in 
an external object, which tends to introduce a 
new series of reflections. Thus, distant music 
may draw away attention from the book we 
peruse, to a scene, w^here the same sounds 
WTre formerly heard by us; Or, in the course 
of reading, we may meet with a passage, 
which suggests reflections irrelevant to the main 
subject. From these, when the mind is con- 
veyed to them, the transition is easy to others, 
with which they are connected ; and in this 
manner fancy may rove, for an unlimited tijne, 
through an unlimited range of ideas. The 
ocean, for example, may be introduced as a 
simile, illustrative of a metaphysical argu- 
ment. Fancy will be drawn for a moment to 
the ocean, and if we have ever beheld it, or 
crossed it, the incident will present itself. — 



COtnaCicu i^mi Liln'atltVC. 219 

Wc then insensibly relinquish our employment, 
to think on the storm which endangered our 
life ; or oh the country and friends, from 
whence the vessel conveyed us. May not a 
similar process rouse us from this trance, and 
recall us to the occupation we had left ? — May 
not a new and unusual impulse upon any organ 
of sense, startle and remind us, that we are 
trifling with time ? — May not the train of ideas, 
furnished by the reverie itself, lead us back to 
the very subject which engaged us, prior to its 
commencement ? — In either way the reverie 
will be terminated. The firing of cannon may 
break in upon my fit of absence. When once 
awakened, but not till then I become con- 
scious that I have been guilty of relaxation 
from the vigilance of attention, and return to 
my study, pleased, perhaps, with the excur- 
sion, but not without dissatisfaction on account 
of my loss of time. The same efTect may be 
produced in the instance of the simile already 
mentioned, if the associated ideas to wliich the 
simile of the ocean had led me, taking a retro- 
grade direction, conduct me back to the pri- 
jnar}' subject of comparison. 
(. 'When listening to the discourse of an orator, 
pr lecture of a teaclier, we digress in a similar 
manner, and are recalled by a look from the 
speaker; — by a pause; — by a sudden transition; 
Ee 2 



220 Reverie^ considered as 

a new figure ; or a felicity of diction or of 
thought. This reflection may serve to anali2ie 
the art of keeping attention awake in others.-^v 
It may recommend the impressions we have 
enumerated, as useful expedients in oratory ; 
and explain the principle, which makes us 
wish to have a public speaker in our view, 
while Vv^e are listening to him. 

When the habit of mental absence is suffi. 
ciently confirmed to constitute a disease, the 
appulses of external objects, which would 
interrupt reverie in stronger minds, are found 
to strike upon the senses in vain. A man is 
mentboned'. in- Zoonomia, who, during the 
paroxi'sm of reverie, was reciting some lines 
from Pope, one of which he had forgotten, it 
Was several times ineffectually shouted in his 
ears; till at length, after much labour, he 
recollected it by his own efforts. Yet though 
isiich appulses do not destroy, they sometimes 
harmonize with ihe waking dream. In this 
case they excite attention ; and the reverie, 
without, being "broken, insensibly glides into 
sutyects connected with these appulses. In 
the work we have just now quoted, is an in- 
lijre'Sting account of a young person, tv'ho, 
while lost in reverie, heard a passing bell; and 
without feeing recalled to a consciousness of 
r-vMandc^f Ing- th^igTit/.^was'-^soon aft^r heard- to 



connected with Liter atttrc, 221 

say, "I wish I Wre in my grave;" — and pulling 
off her shoe—" A little longer and a little 
wi^er; and even this would make a coffin." 

Such are the various kinds and degrees of 
reverie. The enumeration of them was neces- 
sary to the discove^ry of those means by which 
this mental affection may be regulated or re- 
medied. The subject is of the highest iml- 
portance to those who are entering upon their 
studies; since, as it is an argument against 
Wasting much of our time in sleep, that we 
may be said only to live while we are awake ;^— 
sa, with regard to letters or business, rt may 
be asserted, that we do not study all the hours 
we number at our desk, but those only, during 
which the vigour of our minds has been 
exerted in our proper emjiloyment. 

There are several methods by which reverie 
may be regulated and modified. 

1st. The abstraction of excitement produced 
by external stimuli, will, in most cases, give a 
preponderance on the side of study, and 
thus be inimical to reverie. A walk along the 
shore is more favourable to abstraction, than in 
a garden or terrace, where the frequent turn- 
ings interrupt reflection. Philosophers in ge- 
general have shunned the town, that its noise 
tirid bustle might not disturb thfeir meditations. 
Neverthtilc liave heard -of some, whose 



222 Reverie^ coruidered as 

minds were more active amidst the uniform, 
mingled hum of the throng, or the noise of a 
carriage, than in more tranquil scenes. This 
may be accounted for by asserting, 1st. That 
such uniform sounds may be from habit, asso- 
ciated with abstraction, as opposed to reverie ; 
and that it is only by sharp, sudden impulses, 
and not by uniform and accustomed sounds, 
that abstraction is discomposed ; and 2dly, 
That, when this is the case, the sounds in 
question will drown all others, and thus weaken 
the influence of their excitement in disturbing 
abstraction, and producing reverie. Here, 
however, a difBculty arises. If I remove myself 
to silence and solitude for the purpose of phi- 
losophical abstraction, should reverie by any 
means find its way to my mind, and experience 
proves that no silence and no solitude can 
exclude it, — will not the absence of excitement 
from external objects be favourable to the 
continuance of those idle musings, which I 
have taken pains to avoid ? — The first object of 
a student is, to preclude the advances of 
reverie ; but when its spell has stolen upon 
him, external stimuli become desirable in 
order to dissolve it. Hence a retreat into the 
shade will only facilitate reverie ; unless we 
carry along \\^i^ us a fund of information, on 
which we may, ruminate j an object of science 



comwctt'd zvi't/i Literature, 22S 

to occupy and interest us ; and an inherent 
viq^our of mind, \vhich shall enable us to resist 
the slighter impressions on our senses, from 
which the deepest retreat is not exempt. The 
superstitious dreams which are known by the 
name of second sight, are found amongst the 
most uninformed of mankind, in a country 
where the absence of disturbance might favor 
the highest speculations in science. The beech 
of the sea, which Plato chose as the fittest 
place for philosophical instruction, has in our 
own country become the favourite haunt of 
the indolent and the unthinking. 

Objects and circumstances may be so dis- 
posed as to give to reverie a pleasing or pensive, 
and as we shall presently see, a refined or in- 
elegant direction. I believe it is unnecessary 
to ask, whether the mind will not be more 
apt to depart from serious meditation in a 
gaudy chapel, than in the solemn gloom of a 
cathedral. It is remarked by an eminent me- 
dical writer, that light, introduced by opening 
the window- shutters, gave a gayer cast to the 
ideas of a patient who laboured under reverie. 
The study of Tasso was a Gothic apartment ; 
and he fancied his familiar spirit to converse 
with him through a window of stained glass. 

If we can contrive to effect, during the 
reverie, a frequent rc-action of any circum- 



g24 Reveine, considered as 

stance connected, with our original employ- 
ment, we shall, by this means, frequently 
bring back the, mind from its excursion. It 
has been asserted, in favour of the liturgy of 
the Church of England, that, by being broken 
into short prayers, and interspersed with fre- 
quent responses to be spoken by the people, it 
is accommodated to the frailty of human nature, 
and has proved an excellent method of recalling 
the mind, too apt to wander, even from its 
most important occupations, and its most 
sacred duties. 

A house of worship is certainly the most 
suitable place for acts of devotion. The mind 
is no sooner inattentive, than it sees around it 
objects connected with religion, which upbraid 
its >y.eakness,an^ check jts aberration. 

J^jXioy^^ 5:<p^mj5. i;i jth^, last plac^^o [enumerate 
the remedies I WQuld propose for: the diseased 
state of the piind, which has bee^i the subject 
of the present dissertation— and these all rest 
upon a single prin9iple. The ^ — vis insita'*M0f 
the niind, inclining^ by a voluntary exrertiprtt^ 
the sid<? of stu4y> i^Pi^stitutes th^ ^power of re-: 
sisting the seducements of external stirfiuli, and 
of bidding defiance to reverie : — and as reverie 
has been shewo; ^9^ Proceed frpm merital re- 
laxation and debility, so, whateyei; produces 



connected with Literature, 225 

mental vigour may be pronounced an antidote 
to it. 

Now mental vigour is, in great measure, 
regulated by the strength of the body ; so that 
literary persons, who are desirous to preserve 
their minds in a proper disposition for studying 
with the greatest benefit, should remember, that 
with respect to exemption from reverie, it is 
only " in corpore sano'* that the " Alens sana" 
is to be found. 

The first remedy accordingly which I shall 
mention is, frequent and habitual exposure to 
a pure and bracing atmosphere. The influence 
of different states of the atmosphere, in sharp- 
ening or hebetating the powers of the mind, 
was so well known to the ancients, that to this 
cause they sometimes ascribed the diversities of 
national character. " Inter locorum naturas 
quantum intersit, vidimus. Athenis, tenue 
caelum j ex quo acutiores etiam putantur 

Attici : crassum Thebis, itaque pingues 

Thebani.*' A sharp and salubrious atmos- 
phere, by invigorating the frame, will thus 
render the mind alert and active, and intent 
upon its employment. 

Another important remedy for habitual 
reverie is temperate living, equally removed 

Ff 



'226 Reverie, considered as 

from abstinence and excess.* For too great 
abstinence is a direct cause of mental weak- 
ness ; while repletion renders body and mind 
sluggish and torpid. 

It is the property of stimulating articles of 
diet to bestow a temporary vigour, a strong- 
action of the system, which is soon followed 
by exhaustion^ Men of genius, as Browm and 
Erskine, have accordingly been reported to 
have swallowed quantities of laudanum, pre- 
vious to any occasion when it was necessary to 
call forth all the powers of their mind. Not 
content with the moderate and. judicious tonic 
of a frugal and healthful meal, thev have im- 
providently applied violent stimulants. But 
let not this fact be thought to militate against 
our argument. As long as the stimulus acts, 
the mind is, doubtless, invigorated. It is en- 
abled to resist the attack of impressions foreign 
to the subject in which it is engaged ; — im- 
pressions, which perpetually attempt to lure it 
from that subject into the mazes of reverie.—r 
But, as the force of the mind is then encreased, 

* It is after dinner that our poet Covvper, (Jescribes 
himself as pleased with (he movement of his shadow on 
the cielin^, and as thrown into a train of musing by the 
objects which his. fancy beheld in the fire. 



coimected ivith Literature. 227 

bx borrowing to-morrow*s energy for the 
service of to-day, to-morrow will be spent in 
languor. The consequences indeed are less 
pernicious to the orator than they were to the 
physician. His mind may recr\iit its strength 
before a new exertion of its faculties is de- 
manded. But the lecturer, who&c labours wxre 
quotidian, must have entered his class with 
faculties enfeebled and incapable of exertion. 
Finding his spirits sunk as much below the 
point of exhilaration, as his last d6ze had 
raised them above it, he encreased the quantity 
of stimulus in a progressive duplicate ratio : — 
The unfortunate Brown at length fell a victim 
to dram-drinking. 

The Turks, who chew opium in large quan- 
tities, are much addicted to reverie. Some 
traveller relates, that he has observed a native 
of Turkey sitting from morning till evening in 
the same posture, poring in a stream where he 
had fixed a bottle, for the sake of being throw^n 
into a pleasing rumination by the bubbling 
noise it made with the water. 

They who have indulged their minds in a 
habit of inattention and \\^ndering, are apt to 
prolong their time of study, that they may 
finish, before they rise from their desk, the 
task they have allotted for the day : under the 
impression that they are by this mean* redeem- 

Ff2 



2^S Reverie, considered as 

ing the time they have lost in dissipation pf 
thought. 

This is a mistaken economy, and proves no 
saving of time in the end. He, vv^ho, greedy 
of knowledge, neglects to accustom himself 
to regular bodily exercise, will find many of 
the hours which he has passed at his desk, to 
be undeserving of being computed with the 
hours of actual improvement : and will thus 
become sensible, that if a certain portion of 
time had been given to exercise, the hours of 
his actual improvement would have been more 
in number. When the body has been seden- 
tary and indolent, the faculties make fruitless 
attempts to grasp the objects of their study. — 
This is the case in reading : it is still more so 
in composition. With great wisdom', there- 
fore, did the Greeks mingle gymnastic ex- 
ercises with the study of philosophy. In the 
morning, after the spirits have been recruited 
by rest, the mind being (with the body) fresh 
ajnd vigorous, is not disposed to deviate from 
the subject presented to it. It was accordingly 
at this time of the day, that the kings of 
Egypt transacted all their public business. 

In the evening these circumstances arc 
altered! . The fatigue and the meals of the 
day, and the recurrence of the images that 
have passed before the senses, are inimical to 



i:onnected with Literature. S29 

the vigorous stretch of intense thought. Brutus 
tsed to read in his tent, at midnight when hi$ 
frame was debilitated, and his spirits were 
exhausted by a long march, and by the heat 
of the morning; — when his mind was un- 
strung, and prevented by weariness from ex- 
erting its powers in one fixed direction. May 
not the spectre have been a creature of his 
imagination when thus pre-disposed for reverie? 
when his ideas consisted of confused concep- 
tions, furnished partly by his book and partly 
by his fancy. And will it be deemed extra- 
vagant to conjecture, that the passage he was 
reading may have been the story of the dying 
Bramin, who prophetically warned Alexander 
that they should meet at Babylon ? 

I am aware, that th6 mind, when deeply 
engaged in study, sometimes overcomes sleep, 
and assumes new vigour at a late hour of the 
night. In this case, a certain degree of fever. 
In other words, of encreased action, has taken 
place ; which will be followed, and proved to 
have existed, by commensurate mental debi- 
lity and nervousness. 

" Some,*' says a modem author, '* look 
over what they want to remember, imme- 
diately before going to sleep at night, be- 
cause then the mind is not afterwards busied 
about any ideas that might drive it away : or 



23.0 Reverie y\ considered as 

in the morjilng on first getting up, because the 
mind is nqtithen pre^-occupied with any ideas 
which may hinder the subject's getting fast 

hold of it."- jGer^ird's Pastoral Care, 

^^0n the whole, whatever destroys the 
balance between body and mind, whatever 
impairs the firm tone of the animal fibre, ought 
to be studiously avoided by those whose habits 
arc literary. The debility subsequent to a 
debauch, a warm climate, fatigue, corpulency, 
are all favourable to reverie. And every thing 
that br^^ces the fibre, and gives the systerp (not 

* It is a law in the animal osconomy, (hat sensibility 
accumulates as irritability is exhausted : in other words, 
that the nervous fibre becomes more sensible to impres- 
sions, as the muscular fibre becomes less so, and vice 
versa. — Preternatural or diseased sensibility is not found 
in the strong labourer so much as in the hysterical and 
debilitated female. The author of this essay, who can 
encounter without mental pain, any scenes of distress 
whtch he may witness in his professional character,, in 
the morning, when the frame is in tone, has observed in 
himself a propensity to be much aifected by them, when 
presented to him after fatigue and long fasting. What- 
ever accumulates sensibility, encreases the mind's liabi- 
lity to be acted upon by external stimuli, and carried 
away by them from its steady observance of the ol ject 
of its study. And since the exhaustion of irritability 
produces this effect, the propriety of the foregoing in- 
junctions is evident. 

2 



connected with Literature. -254 

a sudden and artificial increase* of action,) but 
permanent strength and exhilaration should, 
with equal care, be resorted to. 

But for the mental disorder, which has been 
the subject of our discussion, we must look, 
in the second place, for other remedies in the 
mind itself, when considered abstractedly from 
the body. 

Much benefit will be derived from conquer- 
ing a sickly taste for light and desultory read- 
ing, and abstaining from an immediate 
application to the fine arts. When they, who 
have indulged in such pursuits, engage in 
studies of more solid utility, they find 
the perusal of historic fagts, or the pro- 
secution of philosophical arguments, perpe- 
tually interrupted by the involuntary remem- 
brance of their favourite and less ievere 
employments. Mathematics is a science 
worthy of being recommended to youth, 
and, indeed, demanding the attention of all 
whose habits are literary; not so much for its 
own sake, or for that of the other sciences 
which cannot be understood without a know- 
ledge of it, as on account of its implanting 
habits of abstraction and of bestowing the 
ability to fasten the powers of the mind upon 



532 Reverie, considered as 

any subject, and to pursue it till it is thoroughly 
investigated.* 

Here, however, a caution is necessaty. 
Elegant literature and the fine arts, although 
thus paralysing to the mind when they are 
made the main object of pursuit, may in certain 
cases be called in with advantage, as remedies 
for reverie. When the mind is under the 
influence of any passion, joy, surprize, grief, 
indignation, which deprives it of the ease and 
exemption from solicitude requisite to its ap^ 
plyir.g with efFect to abstruse researches or 
what is called serious reading, — it will then 
be its philosophy to lure attention into the 
paths of literature, with the elegant classic, or 
interesting narrative j — with the works of poets 
or dramatic authors ; and with composition on 
its favourite theme :— stimulants powerful in 
calming the soul, and charming sorrow into 
tranqiiillityj when rarely and prudently ap- 

* In comparing the effects of the different leading 
branches of education at dur two universities, it has been 
remarked, that persons who have studied at Cambridge, 
adhere long and steadily to an argument, in conversation ; 
while Oxonians, whose pursuits are more elegant than 
philosophical, are content with a more superficial ex.- 
amination of many subjects; but afford greater pleasures 
to their companions, by the desultory variety of the 
ideas which Ihey communicate. 



plied ^ but wbich would J6$e thr'r -^ -t jf 
they were daily admiwisrte.r€d. 

Another ex pieditAXt, wl^ich^/t >yill bcrp^cJeiH 
•to adopt, is the TC^iii^vval of opjr ^^teoe Qf «[tudy, 
beyond the r«?i«pl^ (if po(Ssjble) K)f P^-^Y objeQt 
and circaii>stai},ce which bcijig >pre^cj\t€d ;^9 
any of our ,sciisc6, is a-pt to sedruce attention. 
The fragran<;e of llovyGrs, ti>e voice of nw^»iGJ 
tbe portrait of Addend, ^tbe inin? of rmcn> b^ 
cacb its tr^in (Of associated ideas, to pi^suc 
which, the mind of the student may insensibly 
be drawn off from tlic object of bis study. And 
if the student wishes to obtain a depth of 
thought, a closeness 0:f reasoning, dispatch, of 
perfection in study, he AvilJ reserve these lux- 
uries for the hour of relaxation, k >yas oi^e of 
the maxims of Lycurgus, that prnaments should 
not be placed i;n tjic council balls, as they 
t(^nd^'<^l to alic;U.a^c ^he atti^niion of the judges, 
when listening ,to,tJ)e pjcax^ers. 

Xlbe art of pa^(yy li^s l?,Gef^[l^^d:|o ^e Ihe 
i^X of attcnfipF];-7-t}^je -grt <^ p^Hevcnting ik^ 
' > )* rations of th^rniii^jd frpni l>^;hig brpk eo hy 
.! ;il revericjSj to w5>i -'i w -i- min/U are <^^t 
euycd by cvei-y sdv .... , • '>c^. Ji 

js p<w;Mi>^5'i(<i*r c m^go )bef$o|feQply ab- 

t^rl^o<ti .iniil)ptt,^H,l>»««l trtjlTii^vve !pjra,©t;iscd ab* 
HtJf^li^^i 5T(Offlv<»>>*o!tigW^, Jfti«trttlve,fipM.ig of a 



'2S4 Reverie, considered as 

But common minds, conscious of their inferior 
strength, and of their greater aptitude to be 
interrupted, should cultivate letters in places, 
where the fewest and the weakest stimuli are. 
applied ; — in the shade, remote from noise, 
and not exposed to passing objects. Colbert^s 
having said that his mind was always most 
active in the midst of Paris, if not fully solved 
in the former part of this essay, may be con- 
sidered as a proof, that that minister possessed 
a warm imagination, guarded by a vigorous 
intellect; — that he was willing to give loose 
to the wanderings of fancy, in the midst of 
rural leisure : but ever associated the recollec- 
tion of want of time, and fulness of occupation 
in the metropolis, with the first aberration of 
•thought from the subject he had before him. — 
Besides, it is reasonable to suppose, that the 
studies, of Colbert, when in Paris, were con-, 
fined to the politics of the day ; a subject 
which, by engaging every passion, must have 
entirely engrossed attention, and deadened the 
force of external stimuli: whereas his rural 
lucubrations had, probably, for their subject, 
topics of speculative philosophy, less interest- 
ing, less relating to self and immediate concern; 
and therefore less endowed with the powder of 
detaining the mind, prone to her favourite 
sallies of digression from her main employment. 



cojinc'cted with Litcrqture, 235 

Nothing can be more absurd than an attempt 
to unite a life of literature and of gaiety. — 
The remembrance of ghiring objects and tu- 
multuous pleasures, perpetually obtruding itself, 
on the mind, will soon convince the scholar, 
that his efforts to make thought and dissipation 
of thought meet in the same mind are vain. — 
The recollection of past, or anticipation of 
approaching frivolities^ makes abstraction ar 
painful and violent, I may safely affirm, an 
impossible exertion. The conceptions of an 
effeminate imagination unsettle the mind ; — 
they float upon and confuse the ideas supplied 
by study. 

Indeed a habit of study and abstraction is 
the most powerful precaution that can be 
adopted against the intrusions; of reverie.—^ 
Reverie resembles the enemy of mankind* 
liesist it, and it will flee from you. The oftener 
tmd the more vigorously you oppose it, the less 
frequently will it recur, and tJie weaker will 
be its attacks* While the idler and the man 
of pleasure cannot pcmse even a few pages of 
a novel without mental weariness and wander- 
ing ;— the student will in time bring his mind 
to the ability of prosecuting for tnauy hbursj 
the deepest reasoning, seldom interrupted by 
reverie, and never overcome; 

When speaking of the force of habit, we 

Ggl2 



ciifinot feiltf6^ryc^#ifi^end iht Iiabit of extetrtv 
poTrine^ft'tS s()fei'lcihg, Wh-en a: man finds thsfct 
lTk-\t6rds rtn[U<;t flow i^ an' uninterrupted sirc- 
(?ess!6n, and tltat his ideas must keep p^ce 
with then>, h6 will TifaVe no leisure for idle 
rtliising. 

I-et us strprpo'se, a contentrorr held betw^ert 
t1>^ employment Which engages u^ on the otit 
hand, and the stimuli that act upon our senses 
on the other. Each strives to draw the atten- 
tion of the nlind towards itself, li the erti-^ 
ptoymeint be pleasing, or if several of the 
senses^ ins^te^d of one, be engaged in- it, we r&tiy 
consider it as the stronger party, as having the 
greatest force on its side. Attention would 
be less apt to- waver if We were' to transcribe, 
thai* if we re^d' a passage ift any aut:hor ; if we 
s4v^ a drama peifermed on the stage, than' if we 
pefiised it m the closet ; or if we* were present 
at a parliamentary debate, than if it only reach 
m throu-gh the cold medium of a newspaper. 
When the mind therefore is agitated, and inca- 
pable of intense application, it will be well to 
betake ourselves to any occupation of which 
we are enthusiastically fond. Whence arises 
the fluency of the unlearned itinerant preacher. 
It is to be ascribed to the two last principles 
on which we have expatiated, habit and 
enthusiasm. 



col 



^ifteWnm^mm^e. 237 



Tt often hztppen^ td tiiose "^hd Hev6b much 
rime to reading; ot cdrrtpostfion, that as soort aS 
their rcverici com-fncnccs, they tinconsciouslf 
remove theityfes from thdir Hdok or writing 
desk to some'^^articul'dr spbt iti (he tlpartmentf 
Which may be fttvoutable to rtient^l wandering,' 
6t associated with it by habit. Now, if they 
would prcvioxt^ly affix to the idea of this spot, 
the idea bf consciousness that they have de- 
parted froiYt their prorf)cr btfctipatfbn, they 
would probably be enabled irtrthis rtiannet t^ 
dieck the fit of musing; at its commeDcemeht*,^ 
and to save the tit^ie which x\'ould othcr\vi<(tf? 
have been sqCranclc^ilrd. No one fs urracquaintcJ 
with the story of the orator, who could not 
plead without holdrng a string in- his hatid, for 
tlie purpose of recitlhng^ h?s wavering thoughts^/ 
The biting of our naifs, during composition^, 
may be referred to th<^ same cause. We asso- 
ciate the idea of this practice with that of our 
first and main employment, so thstt the formet^ 
is never present without the la:ttef j— ^and ^ 
fiew tvain of ideas obtruding themselves on cnrf 
study are kept at a distance by the reeurrencfe? 
of the practice alluded to ; which we hav€^ 
previously identified with the recoJlection of 
our origiflaf object of contemplation. As 
nail-biting h intended to fix abstracrioiVi 
drumming with our fingers is a practice, by 



238 Reverie, considered d$ 

which we promote reverie. This it. ,dbcs,^ 
partly from habit and partly upon- a principle 
already mentioned j namely^ that a gentle 
uniform stimulus, draws attention frqin, aJl. 
others^ except such as ar(^,^ud,df;n.!and,viqlent ;^ 
which will dissolve, any reveriej5.,)ioweye^:iiX-*. 
teresting, and however artfully promotedj 
unless in a diseased state of the mind. 

If, therefore, we find that this Jast mentioned 
practice is favourable tptbe continuance of out. 
JIgiiwis ia rthe ; regions pf imagi^nation, we must 
frequently, when.we ,h^ye^^,grca|:ej:^^ command 
over our thoughts, study to connect and blen4 
the practice with internal disapprobation of oun 
Indjolence. . ,, 

If,- however, the habit or reverie have been, 
too deeply fixed in our minds ^tQ be entirely, 
eradicated ;^-or if (as is the case, with many) 
we be unwilUng to part with this pleasing 
w^eakness, and .consider the moment spent in 
such desultory musings, as the most delightful 
of. our lives, we ought still tp^ be anxious to 
regulate them in; such a manner as to prevent 
them from being either unprpfitable Qi;,cCri:^ 
minah - m 

We may hinder them from becoming Unpro- 
fitable, by cultivating a taste' foir intellectual 
pleasures^ by h.abitual application tg a variety 
of branches, of study ^ — and by /requenting the 

3 



connected rcith Literature. 5S& 

society of the learned or the-' refined.' Th^ 
reverie, which we cannot conquer, will thus 
be converted into a rational employment ; — for 
ta^te and meihory will direct it to subjects of 
iscience and utility. 

The best rules for preventing fits of absence 
from becoming criminal, will be found in that 
book, which is the highest authority on this 
part of the subject. Keep the heart with di- 
ligence, for out of it proceed evil thoughts ; — 
the springs of conduct ; the issues of life. Be 
strenuous in " casting down imaginations'* 
that are contrary to virtue ; and '* bringing 
every thought into the captivity of princi- 
ple." — The authors of the book from whence 
these maxims are extracted, were aware, that 
it was impossible to put an entire end to the 
influence of matter over the mind, and to 
abolish reverie. They knew that as long as 
the human frame continued in its present con- 
dition ; — " the corruptible body would press 
down the corruptible soul.*' — ^They therefore 
enjoined the purification of the thoughts; in 
order that whenever matter should exert its 
influence upon mind, and force it into un- 
conscious deviation from 'its employment, 
mirtd might be invariably led by inclination 
mttt "the paths of innocent or pious musing.—^ 
p.liinctilian relates of his' son, that in conse- 



540 J?<?^>^7V<; c^nsidsrfd fis 

quence of his skong ^ttachm^jnt, tp le^tep^, ^ 
word escaped him in the.deUriuq:i vof a fever, 
that had not a reft^r^nce to his f^voyrite occu^ 
pation. Thus when the scientific mind rcr 
covers from a paroxysm of re:vene, it h^s the 
satisfaction of reflecting that Jts tin^e has been 
well eniployed j^ ^hat if it lias not been medi" 
tating some new effort of its powers, it has, 
perhaps, 'been dwelling on some elegant 
thought, or glowing description treasured up 
in study, or heard in convers^t^IoR. And,..i|gi 
like manner, when the r<^v€jie of the virtuous 
man is at an end, he finds, that, while it 
lasted, he has either been forming a good 
purpose, or acting over in fancy, a benevolent 
deed. 

Far diiferent trains of thought pass throi^gh 
the imaginations of the ignorant, the vicious, 
the sensual. If their minds are not mechani- 
cally driven to recollections that' are full of 
remorse and bittern<3ss, the highest pleas^rp^ 
of their revelries -are the remembrance pf soi^ie 
frivolous enjoyment, or anticipatiofi of ihe 
pampering of vSom€ base appetite. An Apicivis 
will fe^fit 4gain in fancy on the hanquet of 
yest^d^y. An Ale^^ander'vS miix^ \si\\ leaye 
tJ^ se?^ whiicb surrounds it ; " ti\riqe ;tq;Vafi- 
^uish .^i feis fees,. ^R.d thric? t^s^^^ther^aj^^;; , 
How fftt m ffivftto^s .P^i^tl^ R'h^n^ap pass^cyj 



cenaeeied tciflt LUtrafure. 241 

will get the better even ui dcvution, may be 
seen by referring to our great dramatic bard.— 

** When I would think and pray, I think and pr/iy, 
To «:everal subjecfs heaven hath my empty words, 
Whiht my invention, hearing nol my tongue, ancl.ors 
on Isobel." 

Idle and unprofitable reveries may be albo 
broken, by having our study hung round 
with portraits of heroes and worthies ; of 
ancient and modern authors ; of any who have 
attained eminence or power, by mental ac- 
tivity and perseverance, and are calculated to 
rouse the slumbering mind to emulatiojn and 
energy. And in like manner may we dissolve 
the spell of reveries, into which evil thoughts 
are apt to enter, by the pictures of a Saviour, 
or of a departed or sainted friend. Who would 
not return, with a blush, from whatever cri- 
minal conceptions he had hung upon, when he 
encountered the eye, and fancied that he be- 
held the frown of personages so sacred ? 

To propose a total preventive? or cure for 
the disease I have been considering, has 
neither been my aim nor my wish. The aim 
would be ineffectual, as long as npind and 
body depend and reciprocally act on each 
other, as they do in the present existence. — 
The wish would be the dictate of that cold 
philosophy, wliich seeks to shut up one inlet 
Hh 



242 Reverie y considered as 

of those few, harmless delights, that heaven 
has apportioned to us, and that nature has com- 
manded us to husband. Yet this riot of fancy 
should be seldom and carefully indulged. If 
it be sometimes allowable to slacken the reins, 
with which the mind is held attentive, never 
let us throw them entirely away ;-T-for though 
it would be pedantry to suggest, that since 
moments thus passed, are inconsistent with 
our active duties, they ought, without reser- 
-vation, to be condemned; — we ought, ne- 
vertheless, to beware of every relaxation, 
which prc-disposes the mind to habitual ini- 
activity. 

Stimuli may be encreased to so intense a 
degree, that attention will be compelled to 
leave the fondest object on which it broods, 
and to obey their impulse. For although we 
have read, that Archimedes was solving a 
problem during the sack of Syracuse, that 
Newton was often insensible to his meals 
having been brought before him and removed ; 
that Gicero calmly pursued his studies while his 
mind was dejected by domestic grief and 
harassed by public vexation \ — yet it is certain, 
that pain or hunger, fear or borrow, or joy, 
or any violent passion, will, in most minds, 
overcome the deepest and most philosophical 
abstraction. 



connected with Literature, 243 

Little credit is due to the story of an Italian 
philosopher's being so wholly absorbed in con- 
templation, as to be unconscious that he was 
upon the rack. — I^t us call to mind an elegant 
sentiment of our Master of Nature, w^hose 
works every philosopher who reads them will 
often have occasion to quote : — 

Oh ! who can hold a fire iti his hand 
By thinking of Ihe frosty Caucasus, &c. 

Philosophers, nevertheless, there are, who 
assert, that man may in time become so perfect, 
that his mind shall be unaffected by variations 
in the state of his body. But even were this 
improbability to be desired, it surely cannot 
be expected ^ — for their mutual reliance is at 
present so great, that it justifies the conclusion, 
that mind will never become omnipotent over 
matter, until it shall be altogether indepen- 
dent of it. 



Hh2 



244 On the Proportion of 

EXPERIMENTAL ENQUIRY 

into the proportion of the se- 
veral GASES or ELASTIC FLUIDS, 

constituting the atmosphere. 

B;^ JOHN DALTON. 

Rcffd Nov 12, i8oz. 

In a, former paper which I submitted to this 
society, " on the constitution of mixed gases," 
I adopted such proportions of the simple elastic 
fluids to constitute the atmosphere a;s were then 
current, not intending to 'Warrant the accuracy 
of them all, as stated in the said paper ; my 
principal object in that essay was, to point out 
the maimer m which mixed elastic fluids exist 
together, and to insist upon what I think a 
very important and fundamental position in 
the doctrine of such fluids : — namely, that the 
elastic or repulsive power of each particle is 
confined to those of its own kind; and con- 
sequently the force of such fluid, retained in a 
given vessel, or gravitating, is the same in a 



the several Gas^s in ih^e Atmosphere, SiS 

separate as in a mixed state, depending" lipon 
its proper density and temperature. This 
principle accords with all experience, and I 
have no doubt will sooi> be perceived and ac- 
knowledged by chemists and philosophers ill 
general ; and its application will elucidate 1 
variety of facts, Avhich are otherwise involved 
in obscurity. 

The objects of the present essay are, 

1 . To determine the weight of each simple 
atmosphere, abstractedly y or, in other words j 
What part of the weight of the whole com^ 
pound atmosphere is due to azote ; what to 
oxygen, &c. fee. 

2. To determine the relative weights 6f 
the different gases in a given volume of at- 
mospheric air, such as it is at the earth's 
surface. 

3. To investigate the proportions of the 
gases to each other, such as they ought to be 
found at different elevations above the earth*^ 
surface. 

To those who consider the atmosphere as A 
chemical compound, these three objects are 
but one ; others, who adopt my hypothesis, 
will see they are essentially distinct.— With 
tespect to the first : It is obvious, that, on my 
hypothesis, the density and elastic force of 
each gas at the earth's surface, are the effects of 



246 OntheProportwnof 

the weight of the atmosphere of that gas 
solely, the different atmospheres not gravitat- 
ing one upon another. AVhence the first object 
will be obtained by ascertaining what share of 
elastic force is due to each gas in a given 
volume of the compound atmosphere ; or, 
which amounts to the same thing, by finding 
how much the given volume is diminished 
under a const-ant . pifessure, by the abstraction 
of each of its ingredients singly. Thus, if it 
should appear that ,by extracting the oxygenous 
gas from any mass of atmospheric air, the 
whole was diminished f in bulk, still being 
subject to a pressure of 30 inches of.mercury ^ 
tjie^ it ought to be inferred that the oxygenous 
atnrosphere presses the earth with a force of 6 
inches of mercury, &c. 

In order to ascertain the second point, it 
will be further necessary to obtain the specific 
gravity of each gas ; that is, the relative 
weights of a ^iv.en volume of each in a pure 
state, subject to the same pressure and tempe- 
rature. For, the weight of each gas in any 
given portion of atmospheric air, must be in 
the compound ratio of its force and specific 
gravity. 

With respect to the third object, it may be 
observed,- that those gases which are speci- 
ficallv the heaviest must decrease in density ^the 

3 



the several Garef'fk 'tk^ Atftksphere. 2 47 

quickest in ascendiiig, If the earth's atmos- 
phere had been a homogeneous elastic fluid of 
the same weight it is, but ten times the specific 
gravity, it might easily be demonstrated that 
no sensible portion of it could have arisen to 
the summits of the highest mountains. On the 
Other- hand, an atmosphere of hydrogenous 
g^s, of the same weight, would support a 
column of mercury nearly 29 inches on the 
summit of Mount Blanc. 

The several gases constantly found in every 
portion of atmospheric air, and in such quan- 
tities as are capable of being appreciated, are 
azotic, oxygenous, aqueous vapour, and car- 
bonic acid. It is probable that hydrogenous 
gas also is constantly present ; but in so small 
proportion as not to be detected by any test 
we are acquainted with ; it must therefore be 
confounded in the large mass of azotic gas. 

i:^0/ the weight of the Oxygenous and Azotic 
Atmospheres. 

Various processes have been used to de- 
termine the quantity of oxygenous gas. 

\ . The mixture of nitrous gas and air over 
W9tcr. 

2. Exposing the air to liquid sulphuret of 
potash or lime, with or without agil;alioi). 



24B On the Proportion of 

. 3.. Exploding hydrogen gas and air by elec- 
tricity. 

4. Exposing the air to a Solution of green 
sulphat or muriat of iron in water, strongly 
impregnated with nitrous gas. 

5. Burning phosphorus in the air. 

In all these xases the oxygen enters, into 
combination and loses its elasticity ; and if the 
several processes be conducted skilfully, the 
results are precisely the same from all. In all 
parts of the earth and at every season of the 
year, the bulk of any .given , quantity of at- 
mospheric air appears to be reduced nearly 2\ 
per cent, by abstracting its oxygen. This 
fact, indeed, has not been generally admitted 
till lately; some chemists having found, as 
they apprehended, a great difference in the 
quantity of oxygen in the air at different time^ 
and places ; on some occasions 20 per cent, 
and on others 30, and more of oxygen are said 
to have been found. This I have no doubt 
was owing to their not understanding the 
nature of the operation and of the circumstances 
influencing it. Indeed it is difficult to see, on 
any hypothesis, how a disproportion of these 
two elements should ever subsist in the at^ 
mosphere. 

As th,e first of the processes above-mentioned 
has been much discredited. by late authors, and 



the sevefiiiWti%^ in the Atmosphere, 249 

•as it apf)ears'irom my' expenehce tb be not 
only the most elegant and expeditious of all 
the methods hitherto used, but also as correct 
Jis any' of'rticm, wKeii properly conducted,* 1 
shall, on this occasion, "animadivert iipon it. 

1. Nitrous gas may be obtained pure by 
nitric acid diluted with an equal bulk of water 
poured upon copper or mercury; little orno 
artificial heat should be applied. — The last 
product of gas this" -W^iy obtained, does not 
contain any sensible portion of azotic gas ; at 
feast It JP^y easily be got with less than 2 or 
3 pdr cent, of that gas: It is probably nearly 
free from nitrous oxide also, when thus ob- 
tained. 

'^.^Tf^l'OO measures of comnion air be put 
to "36 qf pure nitrous gas in a tube 3- 10th of 
an inch wide and 5 inches long, after a few 
minutes the whole will be reduced to 79 or 
80 measures, and exhibit no signs of either 
oxygenous or nitrous gas. 

' S. If 100 measiires of common air be ad- 
mitted to 72 of nitrous gas in a wide vessel 
over water, such as to form a thin stratum of 
air, and an immediate momentary agitation be 
used, there will, as before, be found 79 or 80 
measures of pure azotic gas for a residuum. 

' , in the last experiment, less than 72 
measures of nitrous gas be used, there will be a 
I i 



residuum, containing oxygenous gas ^ if nwrc> 
.then some residuary, nitrqus gas wiJl be founds 

These facts clearly point ^ut the theqry of 
^h^ process : tjie elen^erits^, of Qxygea^.pay 
combine with ^certain portion of, r^itrous. gas, 
or with twice that portion,, but with no inter- 
fnediate quantity. In the former case ?z?7rzc 
acid is the result ; in the., latter nitrqii$ acid ; 
but as both these may rb^^r formed aVthes^mp 
time, ope part of the.oxjgen going tq. (?w^ of 
nitrous gas, and anofher to ,tivo^ the, quantity 
of nitrous gas absorbed " should be vai:iable j 
from 36 to 72 per cent, for common pir, This 
is. the principal cause of ,'fliat diversity which 
has so much appeared in the results of chemists 
pnthis subject. In fact,^ all the gradation, in 
c^UcLntity . of nitrous gas from 36 to -72 . may 
actually be observed with atmospheric air of 
the &ame purity j the wider the tube^ or vessel 
the mi^^ture is made in,. tne' quicker the com-] 
bmation is enected, and the rnore exposed to 
waterj the greater is the quantity or mtrpiis 
acid and the less .of nitric that Is formed, , ^ . 

To .use nitrous gas for the purpose of eudip- 
metry thereWe, we must attempt to form nitric 
acid 0% uitTfous wl^olly,ai>d without a ijpixture 
of the other. Of these the former appears from 
my experiments to be rnost easily and most ac- 
curately effected. In order to this a narrow 



the several- ffdif^i^in the Atfnosphere. 251 

hibc IS'" necessafy;*''bnt* th'at^'ls ju^t' wide 
Enough to let air pass M^ater Without re- 
quiring the tube to be agitated, fs best.— 
I-.et little more nitrous gas than is suffici- 
ent**) form nitric acid be admitted to the 
oxygenous gas ; let no agitation be used ; and 
as soon as the diminution appears to be over 
for a moment let the residuary gas be traus^ 
ferred to another tube, and it will remain 
without any further diminution of consequence. 
Tlien T-Tj. of the loss will be due to oxygen.— 
The transferring ts necessary to prevent the 
nitric acid formed and combined with the 
Water, from absorbing the remainder of the 
hitroUs gas to form nitrous acid! 
"^'Sulphuret of lime is a good tes.t of the pro- 
portion of oxygen in a given mixture, providecj 
the liquid be not more than 20 or 30 per cent. 
for the gas (atmospheric air) ; if the liquid 
exceed this, there k a portion of azotic ga^j 
imbibed somewhat uncertain in quantity. 

Volta's eudiometer is very accurate as well 
as elegant and expeditious : according to 
Monge, 100 oxygen require 196 measures of 
hydrogen; according to Davy 192 ^ but frprn 
the most attentive observations of my own, 185 
arc sufficient.'' In atmospheric air I always 
find W per cent, diminution when fired with 
an excess of hydrogen; that is, TOO common 
112 



252 On the Proportion of 

air with 60 hydrogen, become 100 after the 
explosion, and no oxygen is found in the re- 
siduum ; here 21 oxygen take 39 hydrogen. 

2. Of the weight of the Aqueous Vapour 
Atmosphere, 

I have, in a former essay, (Manchester 
Mem. vol. 5. p. 2, page 559.) given a table of 
the force of vapour in vacuo for every degree 
of temperature, determined by experiment ; 
and in the sequel of the essay, have shewn that 
the force of vapour in the atmosphere is the 
very same as in vacuo, when they are both at 
their utmost for any given temperature. To 
find the force of aqueous vapour in the at- 
mosphere, therefore, we have nothing more 
to do than to find that degree of cold at which 
it begins to be condensed, and opposite to it 
iri the table abovementioned, will be found the 
force of vapour. From the various facts men- 
tioned in the essay it is obvious, that vapour 
contracts no chemical union with any of the 
gases in the atmosphere ; this fact has since 
been enforced in the Annales de Chimie, 
vol. xlii. by Clement and Desorme. 

M. De Saussure found by an excellent ex- 
periment, that dry air of 64*^ will admit so 
much vapour as to increase its elasticity, -^V . — ¦ 



the seveP4ilGas€9'in'tli^4^mosphere. 253 

This I have repeated nearly In his manner, and 
found a similar result. But the table he has 
given us of aqueous vapour at other tempera- 
tures is very far wrong, especially at tempera- 
tures distant from 64*.-^The numbers were 
not the result of direct experiment, like th§ 
one above.— If we could obtain the tempe- 
ratures of all parts of the earth *s surface, for 
any given time, a mean of them would pro- 
bably be 57° or 58°. Now if we may suppose th0 
force of vapour equivalent to that of 55°, at a 
medium, it will, from the table, be = to .44-3 
of mercury ; or, nearly yV of the whole atmo- 
sphere. This it will be perceived is calculated 
to be the weight of vapour in the whole at- 
mosphere of the earth. If that incumbent over 
any place at any time be required, it may be 
found as directed above. 

3. 0/ the weight of the Carbonic Acid 
Atmosphere. 

From some observations of Humboldt, I was 
led to expect about ^^-^ part of the weight of 
the atmosphere to be carbonic acid gas : buf I 
soon found that the proportion was immensely 
over-rated. From repeated experiments, all 
nearly agreeing in their results, and madc;at 



^54 On the P'rutpoTfiofi df 

different season^ (5<^ the y«ar, I have found, that' 
if a glass A^ss^i' filled with 1^2,4-00 grains of 
rain water be emptied in the open air, and 
l^j^i^ins of strong lime water be poured in, 
and 'the mouth tb^n dosed; by sufficient time 
atid €lgitation, the;wbdle of th^ liine' water is 
ju^t'^glturated by the acid gas it -finds in that 
To9uiii€f= of air.' But 125 grains of tl>e lime 
water used require 70 grain measures of car- 
bohits ^cid gas to saturate it 5 therefore, th« 
iO3,4t)0 grain medsureis: of comwioti adr contain 
tO^f^tbonaoacid ; or -ttto of the whok.-^ 
The- -Wight oi the carbonic acid- atmospher-e 
th^S is to that of the whole compound as 1 : 
1460 ; but the w^ighjt- of'Carfx>nic acid gas in 
a given portion ttf air at rtl"^e earth *s surface, is 
Bearlf -rts^Ts- of tiie whole \ because the speci* 
fie gravity of the gas is 14- that of common air. 
I have since found that the air in an assembly, 
in w^hich two htandred people had breathed for 
two hours, with the windows and doors shut, 
contained little more than 1 per cent, of car* 
booic acid ^ gas. 

:^ Having nt)W determined the force with 
ifc-hich each atmosphere presses on the earth^i 
ftuc&ce, or in otlier words, its weight ; it re* 
maips next to enquire into their specific gra- 



the seve^^l^^Q^^^i^tki^A^osphere. ^ 
- These may be seen in tlie foUavring Table. . 

Atmospheric aif, l.ooo 

' Azotic ga^, .....1 V()G 

*" Oxygenous gas, .-..<.,..-•..- 1,121 

Carbohic acid gas^ il^i?.::[r 'If?^'^'^ 
Aqueous vapour^' .'l.V.^.rii.' .700 ;' . "^ 

Hydrogenous gas oil^'^'^ 

' ¦ . ' 1 'nrr: 

Kirwan and I^voisier aiia txx^ authorities >{oi 
these numbers ; except oxygenous gas .atid 
aqueous vapour. For the former I am ''inn 
debted to Mr. Davy's Chemical Researches j 

his number is something greater than theirs : 
I prefer it, because, being determined with, at 
least equal attention to accuracy with, liie 
others, it has this further claim for credit, that 
21 parts of ga$ of this specific gravity, mhicd 
with 79 parts of azotic gas, make a compound 
of exactly the same specific gravity as the 
atmosphere, as they evidently ought to do, 
setting aside the unfounded notion of their 
forming a chemical compound. The specific 
gravity of aqueous vapour I have determined 
•' , ' ,- ' ¦ ' ^ * 

* The specific gravity of hydrogen must be ralcd Coo 
low : if 100 oxygen f^qoire 1S5 hydrogen by measure, 
accordinj^ to thi* 89 exy^en wttuKI require only 1 1 hy- 
drogen to forip water ; whereas €^ require 15. Hydrogen 
Qught to he found about ^ part of (he weight of common 
air. 



^56 On the 'Proportion of 

myself both by analytic and synthetic methods, 
afterthQ manner of De Saussure ; that is, by 
abstracting aqueous vapour of a known force 
from a given quantity of air, and v^^eighing the 
water obtained — and admitting a given weight 
of water to dry air and comparing the loss 
with-. the increased elasticity, De Saussure 
makes the specific gravity to be ,71 or ,75 j 
but he used caustic alkali as the absorbent, 
which would extract the carbonic acid as well 
as :the aqueous vapour from the air. From the 
experiments of Pictet and Watt, I deduce the 
specific gravity of aqueous vapour to be fil and 
,67 respectively. Upon the whole, therefore, 
it is probable that ,7 is very nearly accurate. 
.*" Webave now sufficient data to form tables 
answering to "^the two first objects of our 
enquiry. 

-' ¦( -• 
I. Tahlr of the JVeights of the' different 
Gases constituting the Atmosphere^ 

Inch, of Mercury, 

, Azotic gas , ^3.36 

Oxygenous gas 6, 18 

Aqueous vapour , 44 

Carbonic Acid gas .02 



30 .00 



the several Gusta in the Atmosphere. 251 

II. Table of the prnporlional xx:eights of the 
different Gases hi a given volinne of Atmo- 
spheric Air, taken at the Surface qf tki 
Earth. 

per crrt. 

Azotic gns 75.55 

Oxygenous gas 23.32 

Aqueous vapour 1.03* 

Carbonic acid gas — . 10 



100.00 



111. On the Proportion of Gases at different 
Elevations, 

M. Berthollet seems to think that the lower 
strata of the atmosphere ought to contain more 
oxygen than the upper, because of the greater 
specific gravity of oxygenous gas, and the 
slight affinity of the two gases for each pther. 
(See Annal. dc Chimie, Tom. 34. page 85.) 
As I am unable to conceive even the possibi- 
lity of two gases being held together by affi- 
nity, unless their particles unite so as to iorm 
one centre of repulsion cut of two or more (in 

* Tl»e propofli)!) of aqueous vapour musl be under- 
Ktooc} to be variable for any one plate : the others are 
permanent or nearly so. 

Kk 



•^58 On the Proportion of, &V. 

which case they become one gas) I cannot see 
why rarefaction should either decrease or in- 
crease this supposed afhnity. I have little 
doubt, however, as to the fact of oxygenous 
gas observing a diminishing ratio in ascending ; 
for, the atmospheres being independent on 
each other, their densities at different heights 
must be regulated by their specific gravities. — 
Hence, if we take the azotic atmosphere as a 
standard, the oxygenous and the carbonic acid 
will observe a decreasing ratio to it in ascend- 
ing, and the aqueous vapour an increasing one, 
The specific gravity of oxygenous and azotic 
ga^es being as 7 to 6 nearly, their diminution 
in density will be the same at heights recipro- 
cally as their specific gravities. Hence it would 
be found, that at the height of Mount Blanc 
(nearly three English miles) the ratio of oxy- 
genous gas to azotic in a given volume of air, 
would be nearly as 20 to 80 ; — consequently it 
follows that at any ordinary heights the dif- 
ference in the proportions will be scarcely if 
at all perceptible.* 

* Air brought from the summit of Hejvelyn, in Cum- 
berland (1100 >ards above the sea — Barometer being 
26,60) in July 1804, gave no perceptible difference from 
the air taken in Manchester. — IVI. Gny-Lussac deler- 
niines the constitution of air brought from an elevation 
of four miles to be ihe same as that at the eailh's surface* 



( 259 ) 

On the TENDENCY of ELAS- 
TIC FLUIDS to DIFFUSION 

through each other. 

By JOHN DALTON. 

Rcail Jan. 13, iSoj. 

In an early period of pneumatic chemistry it 
was discovered that elastic fluids of different 
specific gravities being once diffused through 
each other, do not of themselves separate, by 
long standing, in such manner as that the 
heaviest is found in the lowest place j but on 
the contrary, remain in a state of uniform and 
equal diffusion. 

Dr. Priestley has given us a section on this 
subject (vid. Experiments and Observations. 
&;c. abridged. Vol. 2. page 441) in which he 
has proved the fact above-mentioned in a satis- 
factory manner ; and every one's experience 
since, as far as I know, has coincided with his 
conclusions. He has not offered any conjecture 
concerning the cause of this deviation from the 
Kk2 



260 On the Tendency of 

law observed by inelastic fluids ; but he 
suggests that *' if two kinds of air of very 
*' different specific gravities, were put into the 
'* same vessel, with very great care, without 
'^ the least agitation that might mix or blend 
" them together, they might continue separate, 
** as with the same care luine and water may 
" be made to do." 

The determination of this point, w^hich 
seems at first view but a trivial one, is of con- 
siderable importance ; as from it we may ob- 
tain a striking trait,, either of the agreement or 
disagreement of elastic and inelastic fluids in 
their mutual action on each other. 

It is, therefore, the subject of the following 
experiments to ascertain whether two elastic 
fluids brought into contact, could intermix 
with each other, independently of agitation. 
The result seems to give it in the affirmative 
beyond a doubt, contrary to the suggestion of 
Dr. Priestley ; and establishes this remarkable 
fact, that a lighter elastic fluid cannot rest 
upon a heavier, as is the case with liquids ; 
but, they are constantly active m diffusing 
themselves through each other till an equi- 
librium is effected, and that without any regard 
to their specific gravity, except so far as it 
accelerates or retards the effect, according to/ 
ck*c»nastanc'es. 



Elastic Fluids to Diffusion. 261 

The only apparatus found necessary was a 
few phials, and tubes with perforated corks ; 
the tube mostly used was one 10 inches long, 
and of iV inc^ t>ore ; in some cases a lube of 
SO inches in length and 4 inch bore was used ; 
the phials held the gases that were subjects of 
experiment and the tube formed the connec- 
tion. In all cases, the heavier gas was in the 
tinder phial, and the two were placed in a 
perpendicular position, and suffered to remain 
so during the experiment in a state of rest ; 
thus circumstanced it is evident that the effect 
of agitation was sufficiently guarded against ; 
for, a tube almost capillary and ten inches 
long, could not be instrumental in propagating 
an intermixture from a momentary commotion 
at the commencement of each Experiment. 

FIRST CLASS. 



with Atmospheric Air, llijdrogenoiiSy Azotic 
and Nitrous Gases. 

1. A pint phial filled with carbonic acid 
gas, the 30 inch tube and an ounce phial, the 
tube and small phial being filled with common 
air, were used at first. In one hour the small 
phial was removed, and had acquired no sen- 

3 



262 On the Taidenc^ of 

sible quantity of acid gas, as appeared from 
agitating lime water in it. In three hours it 
had the acid gas in great plenty, instantly 
making lime water milky. After this it was 
repeatedly removed in the space of half an 
hour, and never failed to exhibit signs of the 
acid gas. Things remaining just the same, the 
upper phial was filled with the different gases 
mentioned above repeatedly, and in half an 
hour there was always found acid sufficient to 
make the phial ~ filled with lime water quite 
milky. There was not any perceptible dif- 
ference whatever gas was in the upper phial.* 

SECOND CLASS. 

HYDROGENOUS GAS, 

with Atmospheric Air and Oxygenous Gas. 

1 . Two 6 ounce phials were connected by 
the tube of a tobacco pipe, 3 inches long, the 
upper containing hydrogenous gas, the lower 
atmospheric air : after standing two hours, the 
lower phial was examined ; the mixed gases it 
contained made six explosions in a small 
phial. The gas in the upper also exploded. 

* The small tube of 10 inches was (hen used and a 
phial of common air ; in one hour much acid gas had 
come through, as appeared by lime vvaler. 



Elastic Fluids to Di fusion. 563 

2. Two "4 ounce phials connected with the 
10 inch small tube stood two days, having 
common air and hydrogen gas. Upon ex^ 
amination the upper was found to be 4 com- 
mon air by the test of nitrous gas. The- gas in 
the under exploded smartly ; that in the upper 
moderately with a lambent flame. 

3. Two 1 ounce phials were connected by 
the 10 inch tube, containing common air and 
Jiydrogenous gas ; in 34- hours the upper was 
about 4^ common air and the under 4 ; the 
former exploded faintly ; the latter smartly. 

4. Two 1 ounce phials were connected as 
above ; the under containing gas about 1- 
oxygenous, the upper hydrogenous : In three 
hours the latter was -J- oxygenous, and the 
former about t; the upper exploded violently; 
the under, moderately. 

5. Two 1 ounce phials were again con- 
nected, the lower having atmospheric air, the 
upper hydrogenous gas ; they stood fifteen 
hours, and were then examined ; the upper 
gave 1.67 with nitrous gas, the under 1.66. — 
Hence it is evident that an equilibrium had 
taken place, or the two gases were uniformly 
diffused through each other in both phials. 



261: 6n the Tendency of 

THIRD CLASS. 



with Oxygenous Gas, uitmospheric Air, Hy- 
drogenous and Azotic Gases. 

The results of the preceding experiments 
upon gases that have no known affinity for 
each other, were conformable to what h priori, 
I had conceived ; for, according to my hy- 
pothesis, every gas diffuses itself equably 
through any given space that may be assigned 
to it, and no other gas being in its way can 
prevent^ though it may considerably retard this 
diffusion. But in some of the following ex- 
periments, in which the two gases are knov^n 
to have a chemical affinity for each other, I 
expected different results from what were 
found; perhaps without ' sufficient reason. 
For, chemical union cannot take place till the 
particles are brought into contiguity ; and the 
elastic force which sets them in motion ap- 
pears, from the above experiments, to be a 
principle diametrically opposite to affinity.— 
That circulation of elastic fluids, therefore, 
which we have now before us, cannot be acr 
celerated by their having a chemical affinity 
for each other. Another circumstance deserves 



explanation ; — when imruus ima u\\^x:iivjas 
gas are in the two phials, the residuary gases 
after the experiment are nearly as pure as 
before ; because those portions of them that 
me^t in the tube, form nitrous acid vapour, 
which is absorbed by the moisture in the 
phials, and therefore docs not contaminate 
either gas. 

1 . Two 1 ounce phials were connected with 
the small tube, the under containing nitrous 
gas, the upper atmospheric' air ; after three 
hours, the upper phial was taken off when 
a quantity of air was perceived to enter, as 
was expected ; the air in the upper phial was 
scarcely distinguishable from what it was at 
first ; that in the under phial was still so much 
nitrous as to require its own bulk of common 
air to saturate it. 

2. The above experiment was repeated, 
and the upper phial drawn off when the 
whole was under water, in order to prevent 
communication with the atmosphere : about 
i' of an ounce of water entered the phials, to 
compensate the diminution. Remaining air in the 
upper phial was a very little worse than com- 
mon air, it being of the standard 1,47 when 
the former was 1,44. The gas in the under 
phial was still nitrous and nearly of the same 

l1 



J^r^s On the Tendencij of 

purity as at first ; for 3 parts of it required 4 
of atmospheric air to saturate them. 

3. Nitrous gas and one ^ oxygenous were 
tried in the same way : after four hours, the 
apparatus was taken down under water. The 
upper phial was ^ filled with water, and the 
gas in it was partly driven down the tube into 
the other phial, by which, and the previous 
process, the nitrous gas was completely satu- 
rated and nothing but azotic with a small 
.portion of oxygenous were found in the under 
phial : the remaining gas in the upper phial 
was still t oxygenous, 

, 4. Jvjtvous gas and hydrogenous: in three 
hours the upper phial was 4 nitrous, and of 
course the under must have a like part of 
hydrogen. 

5. Nitrous gas and azotic : after three hours 
the upper phial was -J- nitrous. 

In the two last experiments, the quantity of 
nitrous gas in the upper phial was less than 
might be expected ; but the tube was at first 
filled with common air, and some must enter 
on connecting the apparatus, which is sufli- 
cient to account for the results. 



Elastic Fluids to Difuslon. 267 

FOlUnil CI. ASS. 

AZOTIC 

xcith mixlures containing oxi/gaions gas. 

1 . Azotic gas and one -J- oxygenous : after 
standing three hours the upper phial was of the 
standard 1.78, or about ^-'^: oxygenous. 

'2. Azotic gas with atmospheric air: after 
standing three hours : the upper phial was not 
sensibly diminished by nitrous gas ; the under 
phial, however, had lost 2 per cent, or -^ of its 
oxygen. The reason of this was, that the 
azotic gas in this experiment having been just 
made for it from nitrous gas, this last had not 
been completely saturated with atmospheric 
airi dnd hence had seized upon all the oxygen 
ascending into the upper phial. 

Having now related all the experiments I 
rnade of any importance to the subject, it will 
be proper to add, for the sake of those that 
may wish to repeat some of them, that great 
care must be taken to keep the inside of the 
tube dry ; for if a drop of water interpose be- 
tween the two gases, I have found that it 
effectually prevents the intercourse : Glass 
tubes should tlierefore be used, that one may 
be satisfied on this head, as the obstruction 
will then be visible, 

1 I 'i 



268' ' On the Tendency of 

I shall make no further comments on the 
^bovc experiments, by way of explanation ; 
because to those who understand my hy- 
pothesis of elastic fluids, they need none : and 
I think: it would be in vain to attempt an ex- 
piation any other way. I cannot however, on 
this occasion, avoid adverting to some experi- 
ments of Dr. Priestley, w^hich few modern 
philosophers can be unacquainted with : I 
mean those relating to the seeming conversion 
of water into air. (Vid, Philos.Transact. vol. 73, 
page 414 — or his Expts. abridged, vol. 2, 
page 407.) He found that unglazed eartheu 
retorts containing a little moisture, w^hen 
heated, admitted the external air to . pass 
through their pores at the same time that 
aqueous vapour passed tbrough the pores the 
contrary way or outward ; and that this- last 
circumstance was necessary to the air's en- 
trance. The retorts are air-tight, so far as that 
blowing into them discovers no pores; but 
when subjected to a greater pressure, as that 
of the atmosphere, or even one much short of 
it, they are not able to prevent the passage of 
elastic fluids. The fact of air passing into the 
retort through its pores, and vapour out of them 
at the same time, are elegantly and most con- 
vincingly §hewn by Dr. Priestley's experiments, 
in which he used the apparatus represented in 
plate 7, fig. 1, pf the edition above referred to. 



Elastit FiiMff fo Bifilh'on, ^69 

The Doctor confesses his explanation of these 
remarkable facts is very inadequate 5 aixl no 
wonder, for it is impossible for him or any 
other to explain them on the commonly received 
principles of elastic fluids. But we will hear 
what he says on the subject : — *' At present it 
^* is my opinion, that the agent in this case \n 
?''that principle which we call attraction of 
" cohesion, or that power by which wa^er is 
" raised ift^ (papillary tube*^:- *' But in what 
^< manner it «k:t& ii^ this Case I am far from 
*^ being able to explain. Much less can I 
*' imagine how air should pass one way and 
" vapour the other, in the same pores, and 
" how the transmission of the one should be 
** necessary to the transmission of the other. — 
** lam satisfied, however, that it is by means 
" of such pores as air may be forced through, 
j^that this curious process is performed; be- 
•* cause the experiment never succeeds but 
" in such vessels as, by the air pump at least, 
" appear to be porous, though in all such.** 

The truth is, these facts so difficult to ex- 
plain are exactly similar to those which are the 
subject of this Memoir: Only instead of a 
great numher of pores we have one of sensible 
magnitude, (the bore of the tube). Let the 
porous retort have the same elastic fluid within 
and without, in the one case ; and the two 



::70 On the Tendenci) of 

phials contain the same elastic fluid in the 
other, then no transmission is observable in 
either : but if the retort, have common air, 
or any other gas, v^ath out, and aqueous vapour, 
or any other elastic fluid, except the outside 
one, within ; then th^ motion in and out 
commences, just as with the phials in similar 
circumstances;.;, In fact this last ^observation 
has since been verified by Dr. Priestley himself, 
of which anliccount is given in No. 2, of the 
American Philosophical Transactions, vol. 5. 
After alluding itp his experiments above-men- 
tioned he observ-es, " Since that time I have 
" extended and diversified the experiments, 
" and have ob^ryed^ thdt lyhat was done by 
" air and w^l^r,. will be done by any two 
[^ Jiljids ^ fl/r>i;and ;wbether tbey have afiinity 
"'to one another ox not, that this takes place 
"in circumstances, of which I, was not at all 
" apprized before,, and such as experimenters 
" ought to be^lac^uainted with, in order to 
" prevent mistal>:es of considerable conse- 
" quence.'' - 

The , facts stated above, taken altogether, 
appear to me tojorm as decisive evidence for 
that theory of elastic fluids whichT maintain, 
and against the one commonly received, as 
as any physical .principle .which, has ever been 
deenied a. subject of dispute, can adduce. 



( 2^1 ') 



ABSORPTION OF GA^ES 

PP^ater and other Liquids, 

By JOHN DALTON. 

P^cad October ar, 1803. 

1 . IF a quantity of pure water be boiled ra- 
pidly for a short time in a vessel with a narrow 
aperture, or if it be subjected to the air-pump, 
the air exhausted from the receiver containing: 
the water, and then be briskly agitated for 
some time, very nqarly the whole of any gas 
tlie water 'may contain, will be extricated 
from it. 

2. If a quantity of water thus freed from air 
be agitated in any kind of gas, not chemically 
uniting with water, it will absorb its bulk of 
the gas, or otherwise a part of it equal to some 
one of the followjng fractions, namely, 4, ^^, 
TT» t4.t* .^c- ^^^c^*»^ being the cubes of the 
reciprocals of the natural numbers 1,2, 3, &c. 
or -^ , ^,,, ,-^. , ^^^ , See. the same gas al- 
ways being absorbed in the same proportion. 



oro 



On the Absorption of Gases 



as exhibited in the following table : — It must 
be understood that the quantity of gas is to be 
measured M the presstife and temperature 
with whidi the impregnation is effected. 



Bulk absorbed, the bulk 
of water being unity. 

f3 = l 


Carbonic acid gas, sul- 
phuretted hydrogen, nitrous 
oxide.* 


23 = T Olefiaut gas, of the Butch 
clicmists. 


1 


Oxygenous gas, nitraus 
gas,t carburetted hydrogen 
gas, from stagnant water. . 


43 = A ! Azotic gas, hydrogeuous 
1 gas, carbonic oxide. 


53 =% TTT I None discovered. 



3. The gas thus absorbed may be recovered 
from the water the same in quantity and qua- 

* According to Mr. William Henry's experhnents, water 
dees not imbibe qidite its bulk of nitrous oxide ; in one or 
two instances with me it has come very near it : The ap- 
parent deviation of tbig gas, may be owing to the difficulty 
of ascertaining the exact degree of its impurity, 

f About -j'-jy of nitrous gas is usually absorbed ; and /^ h 
rftcovepable : This diiftrence is owing to the residuum of 
o:^ygen in the water, each measure of which takes 3|. of 
nilsrous gas to saturate it, when in water. Perhaps it may 
be found that nitrous gas usually contains rt small portion of 
nitrtmsaxdde. 



j.u ir^fffr a?i(I other Lfg^ids^ 273 

Ihy as it cntun^d, by the means pointed out in 
the 1st article. 

4. If a quantity of water free from air be 
agitated with a mixture of two or more ga^es 
(such as atmospheric *ir) the water will absorb 
portions of each gas the same, as if they were 
presented to it separately in their proper den* 
bity. ,. . 

Jlxj gr. Atmospheric air, conslstin^g of lif 
parts azotic gas, and 2 1 parts oxygenous -gas,^ 
per cent. 

Water absorbs -5-V of^^^, azotic ^gas ^1.234 
. ,V of T-W? oxygen gas = .77^ 



Sum, per cent. 'J. 1 2 

5. If water impregnated with any one gas 
(as hydrogenous) be agitated .with another 
gas equally absorbable (as azotic) there 
will apparcNtlj/ be i)o absorption of the latter 
gas j just as muph gas being found after agi- 
tation as was introduced to the water; but 
upon examination the residuary gas will be 
found a mixture of the two, and the parts of 
each, in the water, will be exactly propor- 
tional to those out of the water. 

6. If water impren^natedwfth any one ga<; 
be agitate4 witji 'Another gas ; nore ab- 
sorbable 3 there wiU apparcntlii be,i^ iucreaije 

Mm 



27 !• On the Absorption of Gases 

or diminution .of the latter ; but upon exami- 
nation the residuary gas will be found a 
fnixture of the two, and the proportions 
agreeable to article 4. 

7. If a quantity of water in a phial having a 
ground stopper very accurately adapted, be 
agitated w^ith any gas, or mixture of gases, till 
the due share has entered the water ; then, if 
the- stopper be secured, the phial may be ex- 
posed to any variation of temperature^ without 
disturbing the equilibrium : That is, the quan- 
tity of gas in the water will remain the same 
whether it be exposed to heat or cold, if the 
stopper be air-tight. 

N. B. The phial ought not to be near full of 
w^ater, and the temperature should be between 
32° and 21 2^ 

8. If. water be impregnated with one gas 

(as oxygenous), and another gas, having an 

affinity for the former (as-nitrous), be agitated 

along with it s the absorption of the latter gas 

will be greater^, by the quantity necessary to 

saturate the former, than it would have been 

if the water had been free from ^ras.* 

o 

* One part of oxygenous gas requires 3.4 of nitrous ^as to 
saturate it in water. It is agreeable to this that the rapid 
mixture of oxygenous and nitrous gas over abroad surface 
of water, occasions a greater diminution than otherwise. In 
fact, the nitrous acid is formed this way; whereas when 

4 



h}i IVafrr aiul olhi'v Liquids, 275 

9. Most liquids irci: iiuiu viscidity, such as 
acids, alcohol, liquid sulphurets, and saline 
solutions in water, absorb the same quantity of 
gase^ as pure water; except they .have a a 
affinity for the gas, such as the sulphurets for 
oxygen, &c. 

The preceding articles contain the prin- 
cipal facts necessary to establish the theory of 
absorption : Tliose that follow are of a subor- 
dinate nature, and partly dcducible as corrol- 
laries to them. 

10. Pure distilled water, rain and spring 
water usually contain nearly their due share of 
atmospheric air : if not, they quickly acquire 
that share by agitation in it, and lose any other 
gas they may be impregnated wnth. It is re*- 
markable however that water by stagnation, 
in certain circumstances, loses part or all of its 
oxygen, notwithstanding its constant expo- 
sition to the atmosphere. This 1 have uni- 
formly found to be the case in my large w^ooden 
pneumatic trough, containing about 8 gallons, 
or 14" cubic foot of w^ater. Whenever this is 
replenished with tolerably pure rain water, it 
contains its share of atmospheric air ; but in 
process of time it becomes deficient of oxygen; 

^v,... / ., ,,.ji present li.. /.<./.^ ..^vv. i$ formei which require^ 
just half the quantity of jxitroiv? gas, as I have ktely ascer- 

M m 2 



^7(> On the Absorption of Gases 

In tliree months the whole surface has been to- 
vered with a pellicle, and no oxygenous gas what- 
ever was found in the water. It was srrowu 
offensive, but not extremely so ; it had not 
been contaminated with any material portion 
of. metallic or sulphureous mixtureis, ©T any 
other article to which the effect "^rould be 
ascribed.* The quantity of azotic gas is not 
materially diminished by stagnation, if at all. — 
These circumstances, not being duly noticed, 
have been the source of great diversity in the 
results of different philosophers upon the 
quantity and quality of atmospheric- air in 
water.- ' By article 4, it appears that atmo- 
spheric uir expelled from water ought to have 
S8 per cent, oxygen ; whereas by this article 
air may be expelled from water that shall 
contain^from 38 to per cent, of oxygen. — 
The disappearance of oxygenous gas in water, 
I presume, must be owing to some impurities 
in the Water which combine with the oxygen. 
Pure rain water that had stood more than a 
vear HI ^rn earthenware bottle had lost nonfe of 
its oxygen. 

1 1. If water free from air be agitated with 
a 6m'airf)ortion of atmospheric air (as 4r ^^ i^s 
bulk) the residuum of such air will have pro- 
portionally less ; oxygen than the original: If 

* It was drawn from a leaden cistern. 



/»;/ Wafer //"^/ other Liquids, 2W 

wc take Vt? ^^ aoovc, then the residuum wil! 
have only 17 per cent, oxygen ; agreeably to 
the prindpJe established in article 4, ITiis 
circumstance accounts for the observations 
made by Dr. Priestley, and Mr. William 
1 f enry^ that water absorbs o^^gen In pre- 
ference to azot. 

12. if a tall glass vessel, containing a smaU 
portion bf gas ht inverted into a deep trough 
of water iand the gas thus conlined by the 
glass ai^ the water be briskly agitated, it will 
gradually disappear. 

It is a wonder that Dr. Priestly, who seems 
to have been the first to notice this fact, should 
hnve made any difficulty of it; — the loss of 
lias evidently « 4iiechanical cause ; the 
ai^ilation divides the air into an infinite 
number of minute bubbles winch may be seen 
pervading the whole watfer ; these are succes- 
sively driven out ifom tmdcr the margin of the 
glass into the trough, and so escape. 

13. If old stagnant water be in the trough, 
in the last experiment, and atmospheric air be 
the subject, tiie oxygenous gas will very soon 
be almost wholly extracted and leave a re- 
siduum of azotic gas ; but if the water be fully 
impregnated with atmospheric air at the be- 
ginning, the residuary gas examined at any 
time will be pure atmospheric air. 



278 On the Absorption qf Gases 

14-. If any gas not containing e/ither azotic 
or oxygenous gas, be agitated over water con- 
taining atmospheric air, the residuum will be 
found to contain both azotic and oxygenous 
gas. 

15. Let a quantity of water contain equal 
portions of any two or more unequally absorb- 
able gases; For instance, azotic gas, oxy- 
genous gas and carbonic acid gas ^ then, let 
the water be boiled. , or subjected to the air- 
pumpj and it will be found that unequal por- 
tions of the gases will be expelled. The azotic 
will be the greatest'paft, the oxygenous next, 
and the carbonic acid will be the least. — For, 
the previous impregnation being such as is 
due to atmospheres of the following relative 
forces nearly ; 

Azotic — — 21 inch, of mercury 
Oxygenous — 9- — : 



Carbonic acid -f 

consequently, when those forces are removed, 
the resiliency of the azotic gas will be the 
greatest, and that of the carbonic acid the 
least ; the last will even be so small as not ta 
overcome the cohesion of the water without 
violent agitation. 



hij ITaUr and other Uquiih. (?7^ 

Remarks on the Author it ij of the preceding 
Facts. 

In orddr to give the chain of facts as distinct 
as possible, I have not hitherto mentioned by 
whom or in \vhat manner they were ascer- 
tained. 

The fact mentioned in the first article has 
been long known; a doubt, however, remained 
rsspecting the quantity of air still left in water 
after ebullition and the operation of the air- 
pump. The subsequent articles will, I ap- 
prehend, have placed this in a clearer point of 
view. 

In determining the quantity of gases ab- 
sorbed, I had the result of Mr. AVilliam 
Henry's experience on the subject before me, 
an account of which has been published in the 
Philosophical Transactions for 1803. By the 
reciprocal communications since, we have 
been enabled to bring the results of our Ex- 
periments to a near agreement ; as the quan- 
tities he has given in his appendix to that 
paper nearly accord with those I have stated 
in the second article. In my Experiments with 
the less absorbable gases, or those of the 2d, 
3d, and 4th' classes, I used a phial holding 
2700 grains of water, having a very accurately 



280 On the Absorption of Gases^. 

ground-stopper; in those with the more ab- 
sorbable of the first class, I used an Eudiometer 
tube properly graduated and of aperture so as 
to be covered with the end of a finger. This 
was filled with the gas and a small portion ex- 
pelled by introducing a §olid body under 
.w^ater; the quantity being noticed by the 
quantity of water that entered on withdrawin^r 
the solid body, the finger was applied to 
the end and the water within agitated; thea 
removing the finger for a moment under water, 
an additional quantity of water entered, and 
the agitation was repeated till no more water 
would enter, when the quantity and quality 
of the residuary gas was examined. In fact 
.water could never be made to take its bulk of 
any gas by this procedure ; but if it took -^-V, or 
any other part, and the residuary gas was -rV 
pure, then it was inferred that water would 
take its bulk of that gas. The principle was 
the same in using the phial ; only a small 
quantity of tlie gas was admitted, and the 
agitation was longer. 

There, are two very important facts contained 
in the second article. The first , is, that the 
quantity of gas abs.orbed is as the density or 
pressure. — This was dicovered.by Mr. Wm. 
Henry, before either he or I had formed any 
Ibeory on tht? subject. 



by Water and oilier Liquids. 281 

** "ITie other is, that the density of the gas In 
the water has a special relation to that out of 
the water, the distance of the particles within 
being always some multiple of that without : — 
Thus, in the case of carbonic acid, 8ic. the 
distance within and witliout is the same, or 
the gas within the water is of the same density 
as without ; in olefiant eras the distance of the 
particles in the'water Is twice that without; in 
oxygenous gasj Zic. the distance is just three 
times as great within as without ; * and in 
azotic, &c. it is four times. This fact was the 
riesult of my own enquiry. The former of 
these, I think, decides the effect to be mecha- 
nical; and the latter seems to point to the 
principle on which the equilibrium is ad- 
justed. 

Tlie facts noticed in the 4th, 5th and 6th 
articles, were investigated h priori from the 
mechanical hypothesis, and the notion of the 
distinct agency of clastic fluids when mixed 
together. The results were found entirely to 
agree with both, or as nearly as could be ex- 
pected from experiments of^uch nature. 

The facts mentioned in the 7th article, are 
of great importance in a theoretic view ; for, 
f the quantity of gas absorbed depend upon 
mechanical principles, it cannot be affected 
by temperature in confined air, as the mecha- 
N n 



i?8$ On the Absorption of Gases 

nical effect of the external arid internal air are 
alike inpreased by heat, and the density not at 
all affected in those circumstances. I havp 
tried the experiments in a considerable variety 
of temperature without perceiving any devi- 
ation from the principle. It deserves further 
attention. 

If water be, as pointed out by this essay, a 
mfere receptacle of gases^ it cannot affect their 
affinities : henpe what is observed in the 8th 
article is top obvious to need explanation. — 
And if we find the absorption of gases to 
arise not from a chemicaj but a mechanical 
cause, it may be expected that all liquids 
having an equal fluidity w^ith water, will ab- 
sorb like portions of gas. In several liquids J 
have tried no perceptible difference has been 
found ', but this deserves further investiga- 
tion. 

After what has been observed, it seems un- 
necessary to add any explanation of the 10th 
and following articles. 

Theorjj of the Absorptw7i of Gases hi), 
lFate?\ 8(c. 

From the facts developed in the preceding 
articles, the following theory of the absorption 
of gases by water seems deducible. 



by Wattr and other Liquids, 283 

1 . All gases that enter into water and other 
liquids by means of pressure, and are wholly 
disengaged again by the removal of that 
pressure, are mecJianically mixed with the 
liquid, and not chemicallij combined with it. 

2. Gase^ so mixed with water, &c. retain 
llheir elasticity ot' repulsive power amongst 
tTieir own particles, just the same in the water 
as out of it, the intervening water having no 
other influence in this respect than a mere 
vacuum. 

3. Each g^s is retained in watef by the 
pressure of gas of its own kind incumbent Oii 
its surface abstractedly considered, no other 
gas with which it may be mixedhaving any 
permanent influence in this respect. 

4. When water has absorbed its bulk of 
carbonic acid gas, &c. the gas does not press 
on the water at all, but presses on th(f con- 
taining vessel just as if no water were in.— 
AVhen water has absorbed its proper quantity 
of oxygenous gas, &:c. that is, ^'-7- of its bulk, 
the exterior gas presses on th6 siirfkc<i of the 
water with 4t oii^s force, andoii the internal 
gas with Vt of ^^s force, which force presses 
upon the containing vessel and not on the 
water. With azotic and hydrogenous gas the' 
proportions are -^J and -5-V respectively. When 
water containign'o gas; its surface' must sQpport 

N n 2 



284 On the Absorption of Gases 

the whole pressure of any gas admitted to it, 
till the gas has, in part, forced its way into 
the water. 

5. A particle of gas pressing on the surface 
of water is analogous to. a single shot pressing 
upon the summit of asouare pile; of them. As 
the shot distributes Its pressure equally amongst 
all the individuals forming the lowest stratum 
of the pile, so the particle of gas distributes its 
pressure equally amongst every successive 
horizontal stratum of particles of water down- 
wards till it reaches the sphere of influence of 
another particle of gas. For instance ; let any 
gas press with a given force on the surface of 
water, and let the distance of the particles of 
gas from each other be to those of water as 
10 to 1 ; then eaeh particle of gas must divide 
its force equally amongst 100 particles of 
water, as follows : — It exerts its immediate 
force upon 4 particles of water ; those 4 press 
upon 9, the 9 upon 16, and so on according 
ta the order of square numbers, till 100 parti- 
cles of water have the force distributed amongst 
them ; and in the same stratimi each square of 
100, having its incumbent particle of gas, the 
water below this stratum is uniformly pressed 
by the gas, and consequently has not its 
equilibrium disturbed by that pressure. 

When water has absorbed -^V of its bulk o£ 



^ oi a SQrAHE PII£o£ SIM '' v^ 



y/h//\ 



f/' //'/r/t-r 




Vol.l.H.2. page.285 

HO JRIZ0:N^TAI. Tll^r o£ air m iriLT lEB. o -O 







*x[ \ \ *x' * * \* • * ' 



X X 



l)i.st.iii.r <,{' |,arttcle« 4.. to .1 



. f^//,- V iVy^/^fyr/^,//., ,/ 



l>..s(.iii.-.! of |>.-,i-li.l.-.s .5 t„ r. 




Vol.L.HJ. lof-c. PI V 

lOriJLE VIETV^ OF ^IK IW >V:a.T E R 




AxaOO ScBydroo-ououA o-«* 



Oogenous, NiUoue/Carburettrti 
H>-ilrog^en ga«|yDonutv 



b^ Water and QtJ^ Liquids. 285 

any gas, the stratum of gas on the surface of 
the water presses with 4t of its force on the 
water, in the manner pointed out .in the last 
article, and with -^V of its force on the upper- 
most stratum of gas in the water: The distance 
of the two strata of gas must be nearly 27 
times the distance of the particles in the in- 
cumbent atmosphere and 9 times the distance 
of the particles in the water. This compara- 
tively great distance of the inner and outer 
atmosphere arises from the great repulsive 
power of the latter, on account of its superior 
density, or its presenting 9 particles of surface 
to the other 1. When -^-^ is absorbed the 
distance of the atmospheres becomes 64 times 
the distance of two particles in the outer, or 16 
times that of the inner. The annexed views of 
perpendicular and horizontal strata of gas in 
and out of water, w^iil sufficiently illustrate 
these positions. 

7. An equilibrium between the outer and. 
inner atmospheres can be established in no 
other circumstance than that of the distance of 
the particles of one atmosphere being the same 
or some multiple of that of the other ; and it is 
probable the multiple cannot be more than*4. 
For in this case the distance of the inner and; 
outer atmospheres is such as to make the per- 
pendicular force of each particle of the former 



2^6- On the Ah^rpfion of Gtts^s. 

6\\ fh(5sd jJaVticIe^ df the 1^'ter that ixQ rnirtie-^ 
diately subject t6 its mflirenee, physically 
ipeakiiig, e<^ual-5 atid the satrre may be ob- 
g^rved of the small latefal fcrcel " • - 

i. The greatest difficulty atten^ttig'" the me-* 
(fhanicai hypbthesis; arises frbtn difFerent gases 
observing different laws. AFhy doids w'^at^r not 
adrtiititls bulk of dvdry kind of gas alike ? — 
Thfs' question I have duly considered, and 
tboagh I am not' y^t able to satisfy myself 
completely, I am ilearly persuaded that the 
circumstance depends upon the weight and 
riuttib^r of tlie! ultimate particles of the several 
gase^: Thb^e whose particles are lightest arid 
single being least absorbable and thd others 
more accordirig as they ihcrcase in weight and 
complexity.*^ An enquiry into" the relative 
weights of the ultimate particles of bodies is a 
subject, as far as I know, entirely new: I 
have lately been prosecuting this enquiry with 
rertfarkable success; The principle cannot be 
entered upon in this paper ; but I shall just 
subjoin the results, as far as they appear to be' 
ascertained by my experiments. 

* Subsequent cXperliehitie' renders this conjcctttrtj l^^ 
probable. 



hj/ Wilier and other Liquich. 2^7 



TABLE 

of the relative iveights of the ultimate particles 
pf gaseous (ind other liodies. 



Hydrogen , 1 

Azot 4.2 

^^^^0"^^ '^^v.rwf-f ••- ^-^ 

Ammonia 5,2 

Oxygen 5.5 

Water 6.5 

Phosphorus 7.2 

Phosphuretted hydrogen ' 8.2 

Nitrous gas 9.3 

Ether 9.6 

Gaseous oxide of carbone 9.8 

Nitrous oxide I*. : i^Ji . vj;^. '..'-•- i . . 1 3 .7 

Sulphur 14.4 

Nitric acid 15.2 

Sulphuretted hydrogen 15.4 

Carbonic acid 15.3 

Alcohol - ^.. 15.1 

Sulphureous acid A.l^-i 19.9 

Sulphuric acid 25.4 

Carburetted hydrogen from stag, water 6.3 

Olefiant gas 5.:^ 



fSS A Description of a Property of 
A DESCRIPTION 

of a Property of 

CAOUTCHOUC, 

or Indian Rubber ; 

With some Reflections on the Cause of the Ulasticiiy 
of this Substance. 

IN A LETTER TO DR. HOLMH. 



Jlead February ii, xSoj. 

Sir, 

Middleshaw, near Kendal, Nov. i5, i3oa. 

X HE substance called Caoutchouc, or In- 
dian Rubber, possesses a singular property; 
which, I believe, has never been taken notice 
of in print, at least by any English writer ; the 
present letter contains my experiments and 
reflections on the subject; and should they 
appear to deserve the attention of your philo- 
sophical friends,'! am certain you will take the 
trouble of compiunicating the paper to the 
Literary and Philosophical Society of Man- 
chester. 

The property I am about to describe, de* 
pends on the temperature of the Caoutchouc, 



Qaoxilchouc or Indian Bubber. 289 

which is used in the experiment; for heat 
increases the pliancy of the substance, and 
cold, on the contrary, renders it more rigid \ so 
that when a slip of this resin has been suffi- 
ciently warmed, it may be extended to more 
than twice its natural length, by a moderate 
force applied to its extremities, after which it 
will recover its original dimensions in a 
moment, provided one of the ends of it be let 
go as soon as it has been stretched. This dis- 
position of the substance may be produced by 
a degree of temperature, less than the heat of 
the blood ; it is therefore necessary to prepare a 
slip of it, by steeping it for a few minutes in 
warm water^ or by holding it somewhat 
longer in the fist ; either of these precautions 
makes the resin pliant, and fits it for the ex- 
periment ; which is performed in the following 
manner. 

I made a piece of CaoutchoCic a little heavier 
than an equal bulk of water, the temperature 
of which was 45 degrees : the vessel con- 
taining the resin and water was then placed 
on the fire ; and when the contents of it were 
heated to 130 degrees, the Caoutchouc floated 
on the surface. \ 



00 



290 A Deseripiion of a Proptriij, of 



EXPERLMENT l. 

Hold one end of the slip, thus prepared, be- 
tween the thum*b and fore-finger of each hand ; 
bring, the middle of the piece into sliight contact 
with the edges of the. iips ; taking care to 
keep it straight at the time, but not to stretch 
it much beyond its natural length : after taking 
these preparatory steps, extend the slip sud- 
denly ; and you will immediately perceive a 
sensation of warmth in that part of the mouth 
which touches it, arising from an augmenta- 
tion of temperature in the Caoutchouc : for 
this resin evidently grows warmer the further 
it is extended ; and the edges of the lips possess 
a high degree of sensibility, whic;;V} enables 
them to discover these changes with greater 
facility than other parts of the body. The 
increase of temperature, which is perceived 
upon extending a piece of Caoutchouc, may 
be destroyed in an instant, by permitting the 
slip to contract again 3 w^hich it will do quickly 
by virtue, of its own spring, as oft as the 
streching force ceases to act as sooti as it has 
been fully exerted. Perhaps it \\\\\ be said, 
that the preceding experiment is conducted in 
a negligent manner; that a person, who wishes 



Caoutchouc 07'' Indian Rnbter, 2P1 

for accuracy, will not trust his own sense of 
feeling in inquiries of this description, but will 
contrive to employ a Thermometer in the bu- 
siness. Should the objection be started, the 
answer to it is obvious ; for the experiment in 
its present state denlonstrates the reality of a 
singular fact ; by convincing that sense, which 
is the only direct judge in the case, that the 
temperature of a piece of Caoutchouc may be 
changed, by compelling it to- change its di- 
mensions. The use of a Thermometer deter 
mines the relative magnitudes of these vari- 
ations, by referring the question of temper- 
ature to the eye ; experiments of this sort are 
therefore of a mathematical nature, and afford 
a kind of knowledge with which we have 
nothing to do at present ; for we are not in- 
quiring after proportions, but endeavouring to 
establish the certainty of a fact, which may 
assist in discovering, the reason of the uncom- 
mon elasticity observable in Caoutchouc. My 
essay or letter appears to be running into a 
long digression ; the subject must therefore be 
resumed, and it will not be improper to 
premise the following simple experiment, in 
the present state of the inquiry ; because it 
seems capable of affording no inconsiderable 
dcirrcc of insi<rht into the plan, wliich natiii\* 

O v> I 

o o '2 



292 A Description of a Property of 

pursues in producing the phenomenon in 
question. 



EXPERIMENT 2. 

If one end of a slip of Caoutchouc be fas- 
tened to a rod of rnetal or wood, and a weight 
be fixed to the other extremity, in order to 
keep it in a vertical position ; the thong will 
be found to become shorter with heat and 
longer w^ith cold. The processes of heating, 
cooling, and measuring bodies are so well 
known, that I need not enter into the minuter 
parts of the experiment ; it will be proper 
however to add, that an increase of tempe- 
raturc diminishes the specific gravity of the 
Indian Rubber, and a loss of heat occasions a 
contrary effect in it ; as I have proved experi- 
menially. The knowledge of the latter fact 
leads me to conclude, apparently on reason- 
able grounds, that the pores or interstices of 
Caoutchouc are enlarged by heat, and dimi- 
nished by co.ld ; consequently when a slip of 
this substance which remains extended by a 
weight, or the application of force, happens 
to contract from an accession of temperature, 
the capacity of its pores, taken separately or 
collectively, is augmented by the change that 



Caoutchouc or Indian Rubber. 293 

takes place in the figure of the thong. Now 
if the existence of caloric be admitted, it will 
follow from the preceding arguments, that the 
phenomenon under consideration is occasioned 
by the alternate absorption and emission of the 
calorific fluid, in the same manner that ropes, 
the blades of Fuci, as well as many more 
bodies, are obliged to contract and extend them- 
selves, by the alternate absorption and emission 
of water. — You will perceive by the tenour of 
the foregoing observations, that my theory of 
this case of elasticity is perfectly mechanical ; 
in fact, the explanation of it depends upon the 
mutual attraction of Caloric and Caoutchouc ; 
the former of which penetrates the latter, and 
pervades every part of it with the greatest ease 
and expedition ; by which the resin is com- 
pelled to accommodate its pores to that 
portion of the Calorific fluid which is due to 
its whole mass, at any particular degree of 
temperature. In order to apply the last re- 
mark to the phenomenon under consideration 
I may observe, that if a force be exerted on a 
piece of Caoutchouc to alter the dimensions of 
its pores, the mutual attraction mentioned 
above will resist the effort. But the ease 
with which tliis substance may be made to 
change its figure, and tiie retractile power 
which it possesses on these occasions, shew that 



294 A Description of a Property of 

its constituent particles move freely amongst 
themselves : but where there is motion, there is 
void space; consequently Caoutchouc abounds 
with innumerable pores or interstices, the 
magnitudes of which are variable, because the 
specific gravity of the resin becomes less with 
heat, and greater with cold. Now if the di- 
mensions of the pores in a piece of Caoutchouc 
can be lessened, without taking away part of 
the matter of heat, which it contains at the 
time ; this new arrangement in the internal 
structure of the slip will lessen its capacity for 
the matter of heat, and consequently augment its 
temperature. But the warmth of such a slip is 
increased by stretching it, according to the 
first experiment ; the pores of it are therefore 
diminished ; and the effort, which it exerts at 
the time, arises from the mutual attraction of 
the Caoutchouc and Caloric ; which attraction 
causes an endeavour to enlarge the interstices 
of the former for the reception of the latter ; 
hence it happens that the thong contracts longi- 
tudinally, according to the second experiment, 
and the redundant caloric is absorbed in the 
course of this operation, which again reduces 
the temperature. The preceding explanation 
agrees very well with the phenomenon, as i-ir 
is stated in the beginning of this letter ; and the 



Caoutchouc or Indian Rubber. 295 

theory receives additional confirmation from 
the following facts. 

EXPERIMENT 3. 

If a thong of Caoutchouc be stretched, in 
water warmer than itself, it retains its elasticity- 
unimpaired ; on the contrary, if the experiment 
be made in water colder than itself, it loses 
part of its retractile power, being unable to 
recover its former figure ; but let the thong be 
placed in hot water, while it remains extended 
for want of spring, and the heat will imme- 
diately make it contract briskly. The foregoing 
circumstances may be considered as proving, 
that the elasticity of Caoutchouc is not a con- 
stitutional quality of the substance, but a con- 
tingent eflfect, arising from the loss of equi- 
librium between the portion of caloric, which 
the resen happens to contain at any moment, 
and its capacity to receive that fluid at the same 
instant. Tlie object of the present letter is to 
demonstrate, that the faculty of this body to 
absorb the calorific principle, may be lessened, 
by forcibly diminishing the magnitudes of its 
pores; and this essential point of the theory 
may be confirmed by experiment : for the spe- 
cific gravity of a slip of Caoutchouc is increased, 
by keeping it extended) while it is weighed in 
water. JOHN GOUGIf. 



( 29a ) 



AN ESSAY 



THEORY OF MIXED GASES, 

AND THE 

STATE OF WATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE. 

BY 

MR. JOHN GOUGH. 

COMMUNICATED BY DR. HOLME. 
Read Nov. 4, iSoj. 

JH OUR essays appear in the fifth volume of 
the Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical 
Society of Manchester, which contain many 
new ideas relating to the constitution of 
mixed gases, and the state of water in 
the atmosphere. The design of these papers 
is evidently intended to remove certain diffi- 
culties which must strike every man of science, 
who happens to peruse M. de Luc's theory of 
atmospherical vapour. This attempt has the 
double recommendation of ingenuity and 
noveltv ; but the leading opinions of the 
system, even in its present form, are liable to 
several objections, which I am going to point 
out, being generously invited to undertake the 



On I he 'J'/ieoiy of Mixed Gches. 297 

task, by the author himself. My doubts re- 
lative to the subject arise partly from mathe- 
matical considerations, and in part from the 
evidence of experiment. Certain objections of 
the first class dispose me to conclude, that an 
atmosphere constructed on Mr. Dalton's plan, 
will ap[)ear upon examination to be repugnant 
to the j)rinciplcs of the mechanical philoso^ 
])hy ; and a direct appeal to experiment has 
moreover convinced me, that well established 
facts contradict the essential points of the 
theory. 

To begin with the objections of the former 
class : I am ready to admit the existence of a 
fluid mixture, such as we find described at 
page 543, in the fifth volume of the Man- 
chester Memoirs, with this reservation, that 
the concession is made, merely for the purpose 
of shewing such a combination to be incom- 
patible with the usual course of things, for a 
moment ; which being demonstrated, the in- 
utility of the fundamental hypothesis will fol- 
low, as a necessary consequence. — To give a 
concise view of Mr. Dalton*s general notion of 
the subject, we are to suppose a number of 
distinct gases to be confined in a space com- 
mon to them all ; which space may be circum^ 
scribed by the concave surface of a vessel, or 
the compressing power of an external fluid : 
pp 



298 On tlie Theory of Mixed Gas^s. 

besides this we must imagine the constituent 
particles of each individual gas to be actuated 
by a mutual repulsion, while at the same time 
they remain perfectly indifferent to the par- 
ticles which compose the other fluids that are 
confined in the common space ; in short we 
are to conceive, that the particles of each gas 
act upon those of their own kind in the manner 
of elastic bodies ; but that they obey the law^s 
of inelastic bodies, as often as they interfere with 
corpuscles of a different denomination. After 
premising the preceding particulars, we may 
conceive a certain arrangement of the elemen- 
tary parts of a fluid mixture, in which the ad- 
justment of the whole shall be of a description, 
which will form from particles of any one de- 
nomination, a homogeneous fluid, possessing 
its own separate equilibrium ; consequently 
each gas will exist as an independent being, 
and exercise the functions of its elasticity, just 
as if all the other fluids were withdrawn from 
the common space. This systematic arrange- 
ment in an assemblage of gaseous substances 
cannot be maintained, unless one particular 
method of disposing its component parts be 
observed ; which consists in that distribution 
of the elements which will produce a separate 
equilibrium in the fluid composed by the 
elementary corpuscles of each denomination 5 



On the T/ieo7y of Mixed Gases, 299 

consequently the equilibrium in question can- 
not take place unless the necessary disposition 
of the heterogeneous particles be first esta- 
blished; so that the former requisite of the 
theory is entirely depended on the latter. — 
After having acquired a distinct idea of a fluid 
mixture, composed of gases possessing separate 
equilibria, we cqme in the next place to in- 
vestigate the mechanical properties of such a 
compound; in the prosecution of which en- 
quiry, the comparative densities of the con- 
stituent fluids must be first determined in a 
horizontal plane, the situation of which is 
given in the common space. 

Let the figure PMINKV represent this 
space, in which M VNK is the given plane. — 
Now since every point of this plane may be 
supposed to be at an equal distance from the 
earth's centre, the density of every homoge- 
neous gas supported by it, will be the same 
in all parts of it. Let the constituent fluids be 
denominated A and B ;. also let C denote the 
compound ; moreover let the densities of A and 
B, at P, be p and q ; let PX and X Y be two 
equal evanescent parts of the line PV. Now 
seeing the pressure acting upon an elastic fluid 
is as the density of it, the fluxionary incre- 
ments of p and qy are as these quantities ; but 
the densities of A and B, in the point X, are 
pp 2 



300 On the Theory of Mixed Gase<r, 

equal to the sums of/? and q united to their in- 
crements respectively ; let these sums be called 
€ and/; then ^ is to/as /) is to q, bv compo- 
sition of proportion : in like manner we find 
the density of A at Y to be to that of B at the 
same point as e is tof; i. e. as /; is to q-, thence 
it follows, that the fiuxionary mcrements of the 
two densities have universally the given ratio 
of /? to q ; consequently the contemporary 
fluents, or the densities themselves have the 
same given ratio : now what has been proved 
of die two gases A and B may be extended to 
any other number ; viz. the ratios of their den- 
sities, on the same horizontal plane will be 
given. 

The ratio of A B, &c. being found to be 
constant, we can proceed to investigate the 
proportions of the quantities of matter con- 
tained in these fluids. Let D and d be the 
densities of A and B, in the plane MKNV -, 
also let W and w be the quantities of matter of 
each kind, contained in the variable space 
PMKNV ; call PV x, and the area of the 
plane MKNV y : now the fluxion of the 
space PMKNV is expressed by y into the 
fluxion of X ; moreover the quantities of matter 
in two solids are in the complicate ratios of 
their magnitudes and densities or in that of the 
densities only, if their magnitudes be equal ; 



On tht Theory of Mixeil 6ase.f. SOI 

therefore the fluxion of W is to that of to as 
D is Xo d ; because the fluxionary magnitude 
is common both to W and w ; but D is to ^as 
p to <7, a constant ratio ; consequently fluxion 
of W is to fluxion of to as p\s\.oq ; therefore 
W has to IV the same given ratio ; that is, the 
matter in A is to the matter in B as pis to q. 
In the next place let R and r be the distances 
of the centres of gravity of A and B, from the 
point P, taken in the line PI : then R into the 
fluxion of W is equal to the product of D, Y, r, 
and the fluxion of .r, from a well known 
theorem in mechanics ; for the same reason r 
into the fluxion of w is equal to the product of 

. rf, ?y, .r and fluxion .r ; hence R into fluxion of 
W is to r into fluxion olw ; as D is to d ; but 
D is to r/, as fluxion of W is to fluxion w ; 
therefore R and r are equal : consequently the 
centres of gravity of A and B coincide, and 

# the point of their coincidence is also the centre 
of the system C. Thus it appears, that when 
the component gases of a fluid mixture possess 
separate equilibria, their densities are every 
where in a given ratio ; and they have a com- 
mon centre of gravity : the converse of which 
is equally true ; viz. if their densities be not 
every where in a given ratio, and if they have 
not a common centre of gravity, they do not 
possess separate equilibria. 



302 On the Theory of Mixed Gase/i, 

It is, neceiSjsary to observe in this stage of the 
inquiry^, that though we admit the particles of 
A and B to be inelastic in relation , to each 
other, the concession must be strictly confined 
to the particles themselves ; for the gases which 
are composed of them are elastic bodies ; they 
therefor^ receive and communicate motion ac- 
cording jto the, laws , which are peculiar to 
bodies of this description. — The foregoing pro- 
perties of a fluid mixture, which has been sup- 
posed tq be duly adjusted, is now to be used in 
the examination of the fundamental proposition 
of the new: theory intended to explain the con- 
stitution of the atmosphere. According to this 
proposition, if two gases come into contact the 
particles of which are perfectly inelastic in 
respect;of each other, the particles of A meeting 
with no repulsion from thofe of B, further 
than that repulsion, w^hich as obstacles in the 
way they may exert, w^ould instantly recede 
from each other, as far as possible in their cir- 
cumstances, and consequently arrange them- 
selves, just as in a void space. The preceding 
are the words of the author of the theory ; and 
it is readily granted that the particles of such a 
heterogeneous mixture would recede from each 
other as far as circumstances will permit -, the 
present subject of inquiry then brings the dis- 
pute to this issue ; can that arrangement take 



.>t^' 



On the Theori/ of Mixed Gases, 305 

place amongst the particles of twi> or more 
gases, which will make their ' centres of gra- 
vity coincide in one point ? — For the separate 
equilibria of the fluids, which enter into the 
constitution of the compound, will not be 
established until this arrangement be perfectly 
formed. The completion of this process being 
essential to the new theory, the effect of it 
has been, perhaps, too hastily inferred in the 
fourth proposition of Mr. DaIton*s first essay ; 
for I am sorry to observe, that the inference is 
-not supported by demonstration, drawn from 
the doctrine of mechanics. It is the business 
of the present essay to supply what has been 
omitted, and to investigate the consequences 
which must arise from the collision of two 
heterogeneous gases, differing in their specific 
gravities. 

'.The existence of the fluid mixture, required 
by the theory, has been granted already, for 
the sake of argument ; and in order to continue 
the enquiry, it must be remarked at present, 
that the necessary internal arrangement of the 
compound C, is liable to be disturbed perpe- 
petuaily by accidents resulting from the course 
of things ; to which course the author of the 
theory undoubtedly wishes to accommodate 
his ideas. ITie preceding assertion may be ex- 
emplified in a manner which is familiar, and 



302 On the Theory of Mixed Gase^. 

It is necessary to observe in this stage of the 
inquiry^, that tl)ough we admit the particles, of 
A and B to be melastic in relation to each 
other, the concession must be strictly confined 
to the particles themselves -, for the gases which 
are composed of them are elastic bodies -, they 
therefor^e receive and communicate motion ac- 
cording to the laws which are peculiar to 
bodies of this description. — The foregoing pro- 
perties of a fluid mixture, which has been sup- 
posed to be duly adjusted, is now to be used in 
the examination of the fundamental proposition 
of the new, theory intended to explain the con- 
stitution of the atmosphere. According to this 
proposition, if two gases come into contact the 
particles of which are perfectly melastic in 
respectpf each other, the particles of A meeting 
with no repulsion from thofe of B, further 
than that repulsion, W-hieh as obstacles in the 
way they may exert, would instantly recede 
from each other, as far as possible in their cir- 
cumstances, and consequently arrange them- 
selves, just as in a void space. The preceding 
are the words of the author of the theory ; and 
it is readily granted that the particles of such a 
heterogeneous mixture would recede from each 
other as far as circumstances will permit j the 
present subject of inquiry then brings the dis- 
pute to this issue ; can that arrangement take 



-VA/^^V^ 



On t)ie Theory of Mired Gases. 305 

place amongst the particles of twi> 6r more 
gases, which will make their centres of gra- 
vity coincide in one point ? — For the separate 
equilibria of the fluids, which enter into the 
constitution of the compound, will not be 
established until this arrangement be perfectly 
formed. The completion of this process being 
essential to the new theory, the effect of it 
has been, perhaps, too hastily inferred in the 
fourth proposition of Mr. DaIton*s first essay ; 
for I am sorry to observe, that the inference is 
not supported by demonstration, drawn from 
the doctrine of mechanics. It is the business 
of the present essay to supply what has been 
omitted, and to investigate the consequences 
which must arise from the collision of two 
heterogeneous gases, differing in their specific 
gravities. 

The existence of the fluid mixture, required 
by the theory, has been granted already, for 
the sake of argument ; and in order to continue 
the enquiry, it must be remarked at present, 
that the necessary internal arrangement of the 
compound C, is liable to be disturbed perpe- 
petually by accidents resulting from the course 
of things ; to which course the author of the 
theory undoubtedly wishes to accommodate 
his ideas. The preceding assertion may be ex- 
emplified in a manner which is familiar, and 



306 On the Theory of Mixed Gases. 

may be applied with ease to natural pheno- 
mena : let us suppose then an additional quan- 
tity of the gas A to be thrown into the pneu- 
matic apparatus, containing the compound C, 
which was in a state of proper adjustment pre- 
vious to this event. No one will imagine, . that 
this fresh matter can diffuse itself through the 
mass of C with the same expedition that the 
electric fluid shews in expanding along a con- 
ductor : this supposition is contradicted by 
various appearances, from which the following 
one is selected , agitation is known to acce- 
lerate the union of oxygen and nitrous gas. 
The quantity of A then, which has been 
newly admitted, will remain at first un- 
mixed with B ; but it will act immediately 
with a repulsive force upon kindred particles 
diffused through the compound C. This new 
modification of A will not preserve the density 
of its parts every where in a constant ratio, to 
the density of the corresponding parts of B ; 
and this change will disjoin the centres of grar 
vity of A and B; which has been proved 
above. But when these points are placed 
apart, the separate equilibria of the fluids cease 
to exist, which has also been demonstrated 
before ; therefore A and B begin to act and 
react mutually; which circumstance disturbs 
the necessary adjustment of C, and forces it 



Vji the Theory of Mixed Gases, ^^qi 

to. assume unother character. It has also bceji 
proved in a former paragraph, that tlie two 
Huiils \vill act upon each otlier in the manner of 
clastic bodies, even when the heterogeneous 
particles are suppos(;d,to be mutually inelastic; 
consequently A and B will beg'ui to obey thje 
the law of their specific gravities, as soon as 
their centres of gravity are separated by intro- 
ducing into the iipace occupied by C, a freah 
rjuantity of A or JB; in consequence of this 
alteration the centre of gi'avity of the heavier 
fluid will begin to descend while that of the 
lighter moves upwards. When once tl>e 
centres of two gases are placed apart their se- 
paration will become permanent ; because 
when at a distance they are urged in opposite 
directions by a force resulting from the dif- 
ference of the specific weights of the two fluids; 
and this contrariety of efforts must continue so 
long as the two centres are disjoined; con- 
sequently this opposition of force must be last- 
ing ; seeing nothing can put an end to it but 
an union, which it will always prevent. Nor 
can the mutual repulsion of the constituent 
particles of each gas considered apart, in an^* 
manner promote the junction o( the ci^iatres of 
gravity oftiie two fluids, because the action 
and fraction jpf.a,,n;urabcr ofj bodies amongst 
themselves do not alter the state of their com- 



308 0;z the Theory of Mixed Gases. 

mon centre of gravity, whether it be at rest or 
in motion : so that A and B are under the ne- 
cessity of observing the law^ of their specific 
gravities, just as if the kindred particles of each 
fluid w^ere actuated by no reciprocal repulsion 
nor any other cause of reaction. The doctrine 
of gases, which are mutually inelastic, is ren- 
dered indefensible by the preceding arguments; 
for the hypothesis is thereby exposed to a dif- 
ficulty which the author of the theory justly 
remarks, makes a mixture of mutually re- 
pulsive gases of different specific gravities an 
improbable conjecture ; so that his own objec- 
tion ultimately discountenances the leading 
opinions of that theory which it induced him ta 
adopt in particular. At the same time, phi- 
losophers are convinced that the atmosphere is 
a compound of gases, possessing various degrees 
of specific weight : they moreover know that 
different chemical agents perpetually disturb 
the equilibrium of the compound, as some of 
them constantly absorb while others unfold the 
gases of which it is composed. The preceding 
facts are certain ; consequently the heterogene- 
neous elements of the atmosphere mu5>t be 
united by a common tie, which may be deno- 
ninated a species of affinity, at least while our 
knowledge of the subject remains in its present 
imperfect state. The transparency of the great 



On the Theory of Mixed Gases. 309 

body of air surrounding the earth, also affords 
a strong argument for the chemical union of 
its component fluids s and at the same time 
discountenances the idea of the compound 
being a mechanical mixture of any description 
whatever : for when a number of diaphanous 
bodies of different specific gravities are mixed 
together, they form an aggregate w^hich is 
opaque ^ but the union of the substances by 
fusion renders the mass transparent in many 
instances. Now as the atmosphere is diapha- 
nous, we are obliged by the principles of sound 
argument to consider it in the light of a com- 
pound, the ingredients of which are united by 
a chemical tie. — Whatever may be the condi- 
tion of the elastic fluids which enter into the 
composition of common air, one thing is cer- 
tain from a preceding paragraph of this essay ; 
namely, no one of them can maintain a sepa- 
rate equilibrium as long as it makes an indi- 
vidual of the aggregate; consequently each 
particle of the compound must be urged by a 
force resulting from the general action of the 
mass, not by a pressure occasioned by a par- 
ticular member of it. \ 

On this account it is impossible for the 

aqueous part of common air to preserve the 

character of a gas at low temperatures /because 

steam cannot support 30 inches of mercury 

Q q 2 



3l6' On the The.ori) of Mtxed O'asei. 

unless it is heated to ^12'degrees of Farenhelt's 
thermometer; were i"t then practicable to' mix * 
vapour of a less heat with atmospherical ^aiftlie 
spring, of the gases would reduce it in an in-' 
stant to the state of a liquid ; so that" the d^fffi- 
culty, which renders l)e Luc's theory olSjectidii- 
able in its origmal form, is not removed irr 
reaTity by tile present modiftca^ion of itl 

The theory of inixed gases has been fouml.to^ 
be indefensible on tlie principles of therrie-, 
chanical philosophy ; and I suspect that part of 
it which relates to the separate existence of 
vapour in the atmosphere, will prove equally 
unfortunate when brought to the test of expe- 
riment. Mr. DaltoUj in all probability, sup- 
posedheha.d done allthatthe confirmation of this 
theory required, by inventing the doctrine of 
separate equilibria ; for nothing more has beeiv 
offered in support, of his opinions,, particularly 
of that relating to the existence of uncombined 
vapour pervading the atmosphere, unless the 
statement of the following experiment with his- 
explanation of it may be referred to this head. . 
If two parcels of dry air, which are equal' la 
bulk, density and temperature,- be confined^by 
equal columns of mercury, in two tubes of 
equal bores, one of which is wet and the other 
dry; the air, which is thus exposed to w^ater, 
will expand more than thafHvhich is ^ept dry,, 

3 



On the Tliedrx/ of Mixed Gases, 311 

• 

provided the' fcoitesponding 2ltigTr>onrati(irt!^ -df 
their tempei-aiures be equ^J-; wWch' phi^fid- 
mcnon is thus explained on the ^rincipk^' of 
the theon'. The vapour that arises froin'th(* 
sides of the vt-et tube, possesses a spring- ©f its 
©wn; therefore it takes off part of thfe' weighr> 
of the mercury from the air, and thereby leavesi 
it to expand Itself, so as to re-adjust thdequi'-^ 
Librium. According to this explanationy iP 
/ and or represent the lengths of the columns 6l? 
dry and moist air at any temperature ; and if-c] 
denote the length of a column of mfertitiiY,^ 
equalin weight to the pressut^ that confines 
the contents of the tubes-; arid if/beputfof 
ihe spring of vapour of the same temperature' 
measured' by a column of mercury, wc have' 

^^^w-y^ from which we also get r=~-^ ^ 

the last expression affords us an opportunitv' 
of comparing the preceding explanation, and' 
therefore the theory itself with facts ; for, ac- 
cording to ^'the experiments of Mr. Schmidt^ 
lOOiD "parts of dry air at 32 degrees ot 
Farcnheit, will expand to 1087, M parts, by 
being raised to 5i> degrees, in contact with 
water; call' this number^; according to the 
same authoi^, 1000 parts of dry air at 32 de- 
grees will expand to- 10>3,61 parts, by- being 



312 On the Theory of Mixed Gases, 

heated to 59 degrees in a dry tube ; let this 
number be / ; then g- — /= 33.50 : but/, or the 
Jipring of vapour at 59 degrees, is .507, accor4* 
ing to Mr. Dalton; theny^' = 551, 164; hence 
c =16,15 inches ; which expresses the height 
of the barometer, together with the .column of 
mercury, contained in the tube. If the tem- 
perature be stated at 95 degrees, c will amount 
to little more than 8 inches : now it is highly 
huprobable that Mr. Schmidt made his ex- 
periments when the barometer " stood at a 
height indicated by either of these numbers.— 
This application of the theory to practice,, 
affords a presumptive evidence, jth^t the prin- 
ciples of it are not altogether just, supposing 
the experiments of Mr. Dalton ; and Mr. 
Schmidt to be correct : but a positive proof of 
a want of accuracy; in these principles may be. 
obtained by introducing a small change into 
th:^ manner of conducting the experiment 
made with moist air. This alteration consists 
in discarding the stopple of mercury^ and subn 
stituting the simple pressure of the atmosphere 
in the room of it : because when this sub- 
stance which is impenetrable to steam, has 
been removed, the redundant vapour will, ac- 
cording to the theory, flow into the . atmo- 
sphere, thereby leaving the moist air of the tube 
to follow the law of expansion observed by 



On %e Tlieorif of Mixed Gases. 513 

dry air. With a view to find whether this He 
the case or not, T filled a^bottle-with running 
water ofthe temperature of 59 degrees, which, 
when carefully poured out again, weighed 
7794 grains. The bottle, having a dew left 
sticking to the sides of it, was placed in water 
at the temperature of 126 degrees: the mouth, 
which remained about an inch above the 
surface, was covered with my hand, care being 
taken to remove it frequently for an instant to 
permit the vapour and expanding air to escape. 
After keeping it in this situation about two 
minutes, I secured the mouth in the manner 
described above and inverted it in a quantity ot 
the same water, where it was reduced to 59 
degrees ; in consequence of which it took up 
1622 grains of water, leaving a space equiva- 
lent to 6172 grains. If the experiment be 
now inverted, 6172 parts of air will occupy 
the space of 7794 such parts when its tem- 
perature is raised from 59 to 126 degrees; 
which is nearly double the expansion of dry 
air in like circumstances. For according to 
Mr. Schmidt's experiments, 1000 parts of dry 
air of 59 degrees will become equal to 1133,03 
such parts, by being heated to 126 degrees; 
therefore, by the rule of proportion, if 1000 
parts give an expansion of 1133,03 such parts, 
6172 parts give only 820 : but the difference 



,314 Qn the T^jy of Jjflved ^ase^, 

of 7794,aifVa6JL72is ; 622, wbiolji; is nearly the 
double of .^2^. The preceding. experimeat, 
and others which I have made of the same 
kind, demonstrate ih^i moist air expands more 
than dry , air under lik-e circumstances, and the 
fact subverts the ngtion of unconabiped elastic 
vapour mixing with Ae atmosphere. The 
accuracy of the fact may be disputed; the 
doubt however is reoaoved by, repeating the 
experiment: but so long as my statement re- 
mains uncontradicted, the consequences of it 
Xo the theory in question cannot he controverted 
by argument : for if elastic vapour mix with 
the air, it does more than merely enter the 
pores of this fluid ; for according to my expe- 
riment, it enlarges these pores at low tempera- 
tures which we know to be impossible^ unless 
the heat^.ofthe compound arises to 21i? degrees. 
Those who are convinced of the superior ex- 
pa^sioi) of moist air, will readily apply the 
principle to certain interesting phenomena, in 
particular to the origiu of Tornadoes in hot 
countries, and the variation of the barometer 
in temperate clirpates. 

Mr. Barrow, an , intelligent traveller in 
South Africa observes, that the atrnosphere in 
Caffraria is sometime^, heated to ;1 02 or ipjt 
degrees: this is suf corded by local thunder- 
stprms, attended wi)thi heavy fa4l3 x}£ r^ia fji:«i 



On the Tlieory of Mixed Gases, 815 

hail, as Well as violent hurricanes. I do not 
pretend to assign the refrigerating cause, or the 
agent that produces precipitation in this case ; 
I only have to observe, that the portion of air 
must lose much of its elasticity, which is sud- 
denly cooled to 70 or 72 degrees, and at the same 
time parts with the water it held in solution. 
This partial diminution of spring will destroy 
the equilibrium of the adjacent parts of the 
atmosphere, and may be supposed to produce 
the tornadoes of the tropical regions. The 
same cause probably gives rise to the fluc- 
tuations of the barometer in milder climates : 
for though the changes of temperature are less 
n the milder than in the hottest parts of the 
globe, the agents that precipitate the water of 
the atmosphere, appear to act on a more ex- 
tensive scale, and through a longer duration in 
the former situations than they do in the latter. 
Wet weather is neither momentary nor local in 
Europe ; provinces, and even kingdoms are 
deluged with rain for weeks together. The 
air, which discharges such an abundance of 
water will lose part of its spring, according to 
Mr. Schmidt's experiments, even when it 
suffers no change of temperature : now it is 
evident that the equilibrium cannot be restored 
in au instant ? because the diminished elasticity- 
must be augmented *in this case by currents of 
R r 



S16 On Ihe Theory of Miml Gases, 

air coming, from remote plkces. The (limi^ 
nution of spring in the atmosphere is shewn by 
the fall of the barometer ; and the subsequent 
ascent of the mercury indicates the arrival of 
•the restorative currents^ According to this 
explanation, the barometer will rise slowly but 
gradually in the centre of the rainy district^, 
while the motions of it will be more rapid and 
less regular towards the verge of the storm. 
High winds will also prevail in wet seasons, 
which will blow towards the parts where the 
elastic force of the air is. least; that is, where 
the rains are most abundant.— I know not what 
claim to originality is due to the foregoing hints 
towards the theory of the barometer; they 
have, however, the merit of being a natural 
consequence of an established fact; I mean 
the great dilatatibn of air saturated with mois- 
ture, which must undergo a proportionate con- 
traction when deprived of water. 



( 317 ) 
ON T|it; 

USE OF THE SUTURES 

IN THE 

SKULLS OF ANIMALS. 

BY 

IVJR. B. GIBSON. 

Read Pec. i, iSej. 

X HE full use of the singular junction of the 
bones of the skull which is called Suture, has, 
from the earliest periods of anatomy and sur- 
gery, attracted the attention and eluded the 
researches of the physiologist. To thjs. re- 
markable feature in osteogeny, ' in : a great 
measure peculiar to a certain period of life, 
many uses have been attributed. Some of these 
are totally erroneous; such as th^it/or allowing 
the transpiration of moisture,.',,^P . keep tb^ 
brain cool and fit for thinking ; j^r. giving a 
mor^ strict adhesion of the dura'^infler to the 
inner surface of the skull ; for admitting a 
more free communication by bloodvessels be- 
tween the external and interp^l- paits of 
head ; or for affording interstices, that the 



518 On the Use of the Sutures 

bones may be pushed asunder by the growth 
of the brain, lest that organ should be cramped 
in its growth, in consequence of the compa- 
ratively slow growth of the bones of the 
skull. 

Other uses attributed to the Sutures are 
merely slight ' advantages derived from their 
structure, which are enjoyed in early infancy, 
or till adult life, but gradually cease after that 
period. Thus at the time of birth the loose 
union of the bones of the skull accommodates 
the shape of the head to the figure of the dif- 
ferent parts of the cavity through which it 
passes. At adult age, when the sutures are 
fully formed, they may occasionally check the 
progress (if I may be allowed the expression) 
of a fracture nearly spent ; — or vibrations, com^ 
municated to the bones of the skull, will be 
propagated with less force to the brain, in con- 
sequence of the bones being separated at the 
sutures. It is, however, abundantly evident, 
that these are not the main purposes for which 
the sutures are formed ; otherwise they would 
not begin to be obliterated at a period of life 
when they would perform these offices more 
usefully than ever. Consistent with this remark 
we shall find, that the true purpose for which 
they are formed, and the particular process with 



in the Skulls of Anhnab. S19 

tvhich they are connected, is fully completed 
before their obliteration takes place. 

When we take a view of t^c mode of jiinctioit 
between many bones, and parts of bones in 
thchuman body, which do not admit of motion^ 
we find that with little exception they all agree 
in this particular ; that sooner or later the 
cartilage or periosteum, which once was in- 
terposed is obliterated, and these different 
portions, or entire bones, coalesce. 

The separate portions, which originally 
compose the vertcbrse, are early in thus uniting: 
after these the sides of the lower jaw ; at a later 
period the epiphysis of a cylindrical bone is 
united to its body : and still later the bones 
of the skull usually coalesce, and the sutures 
are obliterated. Other bones, as those of the 
face, which have no motion and sustain little 
weight, are irregular in this respect ; sometimes 
uniting, but generally remaining distinct, to 
the end of a long life. 

llie original formation of the osseous system 
in several distinct pieces, respects principally 
its speedy ossification at an early period of 
life, and its future convenient extension, till it 
has arrived at its full growth ; and we may 
consider it as a general principle, that where 
two parts of one bone are separated from each 
other by an intervening cartilage, oxhvo distinct 



S20 On the f7>e of the Sutures 

bones merely" by periosteum, at that part 
osseous materials are added to increase theii: 
length or extend their superficies. This we 
shall find takes place, whether the junction be 
effected by comparatively smooth surfaces, as 
between the body of a bone and its epiphysis; 
or between the bones of the skull by jagged 
sutures. Hence' it. appears that the bones 
of the body generally are increased in 
length or extent, not by a uniform exten- 
sion of the whole substance, but by an ad- 
dition of bony matter in some particular 
part. 

Thus the body of a cylindrical bone is 
lengthened by addition to each end. This 
we might conclude would be the case from 
considering the part, in which its ossification 
commences: as this commences in a middle 
point and proceeds to each extremity, it is 
uatural to suppose that its growth still goes on 
in the same direction, or continues at the ex- 
tremities. That this is the case we know, not 
by reasoning alone, but by a direct experimeat. 
Mr. Hunter sunk two small pieces of lead in 
the middle of the tibia, or shin bone of a pig, 
amid measured accurately the distance between 
them : on examining the animal some time 
afterwards, it appeared, that though the bone 
had increased considerably in length, tlie 



in tlie JShills of AnimaU, 321 

pkccs of lead still remained at *the same 
distance from each other that they were before. 
From this experiment we learn, that a cylin- 
xlrical bone is not extended in its middle, but 
is lengthened by addition to its extremities, 
where the body of the bone is joined to its 
epiphysis; the chief intention of the epiphysis 
being to allow the intervention of a vascular 
organ, which may conveniently deposit bony 
materials, without interfering with the joint 
itself. 

As cylindrical bones are lengthed at their 
extreme parts, we are led by analogy to con- 
clude, that the same general plan is pursued 
in the extension of the flat bones of the body : 
and although we have no direct experiment by 
which this has been proved, there are circum- 
stances which leave little doubt but they are 
extended by addition to their edges. Thus to 
take the parietal bone as an example ; as 
ossification begins in a central point and ex- 
tends towards the circumference, it is probable 
that to the completion of the process, it con- 
tinues to go on in the same direction ; and the 
same circumstance taking place in every bone 
of the cranium, it is probable, that even after 
the whole of the brain is incased in bone, the 
addition is still made at the edge of each, and 
that the general enlargement originates where 
4 



C.2t? On the Use of the Sutures 

they are all mutually joined by the sutures. Of 
this process' I had a very striking illustration 
some years ago. In a young subject, from 
what cause 1 know not, the deposition of 
osseous matter had been suddenly increased a 
short time before death. It was in different 
stages of progress, but had taken place in all 
the bones of the body which I preserved ; in 
some partially, in others generally. In all, the 
new osseous matter was elevated above the 
level of the bone, upon which it was placed. 
In some parts of the parietal bones it was only 
in its commencement, and put on the ap- 
pearance ot a net-work, similar to that which 
may beobserved in the same bones at an early 
period of their formation. In other parts the 
meshes of the net-work were more or less 
filled up ; in others again completely, so as to 
put on the uniform appearance of solid bone. 
The same reticulated appearance was evident 
on the edges of all the bones of the skull, 
where they form the sutures, and at the ex- 
tremities of the cylindrical bones, between the 
body and epiphysis. The same appearance of 
increased deposition was seen on the surface of 
the cylindrical bones, with this difference, that 
the meshes were not circular, but oblong 
squares ; so as to put on more of the striated 
appearance. In some parts, the newly secreted 



'in (he HkidU of Jiii/iuih. 22S 

bone was easily separable irom the general 
•piass, ^pd formed a thin layer externally, af- 
fording one of the best prodfs I have met with, 
of the hicrease of cylindrieal bones in thickness 
by deposition externally, whiilst a correspond- 
ing internal absorption goes on. From tlie 
striking similarity of appearance on the surfaces 
and edges of the bones, we may safely con- 
clude, that the same process of deposition was 
going (^n in both, and may thencq infer, that 
the bone^ of the skull ar^^ increased in extent 
by the .ije posit ion of osseous matter at thck 
edges, or where they are joined to each other 
by suture. This fact points out to us, in a 
great measure, tlie rciil use of this peGuli;ir 
mode of junction. 

In oider that the bones of the skull may. be 
increased in extent, it is necessary that they 
should be retained at a certain distance from 
each other ; that the periosteum with, its vessels 
may pass down bet wcetitbeni, free from com- 
pression and secrete the osseous matter. At 
,the ^saiiie time, the tliin bones composing the 
upper part of the skull, resting as an arch upon 
its basis, must be united together so firmly, as 
not to be separated by common degrees of 
violence. For this purpose, projecting |)oints 
from the external surface of each bQne,.ijLre reci- 
procally received into corresponUiugnhche&i 

s s 



S24 On the Use of the Sutures 

which only penetrate through one half of the 
thinckness of the skull, and form an irregular 
kind of dovetailing. 

Two advantages arise from this structure 
being superficial and confined to the external 
table of the skull. The projecting points from 
each side, resting upon the solid surface of the 
internal table of the opposite bone^ can resist 
more effectually any violence, which might 
tend to force the bones inwards ; and the in- 
ternal part of the skull presents, by this means, 
a smooth surface to the coverings of the brain ; 
for internally no appearance of a jagged suture 
is seen. 

From this view of the subject vv^e see, that 
the sutures of the human skull, by their pe- 
culiar formation, at once unite the bones 
together, and so far separate them, as to allow 
the interposition of a vascular organ by which 
their superficies is gradually increased to its 
greatest extent.^ This explanation of the use 

* Since this paper Wds written in the year \S6o, I have 
found, that a similar opinion was published by Professor 
Soemmerring in 1794, in his valuable work, " de corporis 
Jiumani fabrica," To him, therefore, apy credit which may 
belong to the primary suggestion of this use of the sutures 
is due. As his opinion, however, has been little noticed by 
anatomists generally, and is placed in a clearer point of 
view by tlie facts which suggested this further explantion 



in the Skulls of Animals. 325- 

of sutures comprehends and accounts for those 
concomitant' circumstances, which were con- 
sidered by older anatomists as their real use ; 
and as far as (J can see, is not contradicted by 
any fact connected with them. 

of it to me, it has n6t been thousjht improper to give tins 
essay a place in these Meraoiri. But whilst the reader wilL 
see, by the following quotation, the near resemblancer 
between the opinion of Processor Soemmerringand tha 
which I have brought forward, I hope the character of 
pbgiarisl or compiler will not be attributed to mo. 

" Usus horum sic seae habentium terniinorum os«:a 
cranii inter bene liquet. 

* ** Incrementum ambitus calvariie levant, ni enim inter 
" ossa capitis mox post partum suturae interponerentur, 
*' baec crescere non possent, nisi alia ratione natura rem 
" institueret. Tali igitur modo incrementum calvaMie 
'* cum incremento reliquorum ossium convenit ; initio enim 
" suturis, vel potius lineis cartilaginosis ossa iis locii con- 
<' glutinantur, verum tamea non nisi in embrionibus ad 
" fonticulos, ut aiunt, haec linea notabili lutitudine, 
*' observatur. Ossibus enim capitis hie locorum cerebri) 
" CI escente, placide quasi diductis, cartilago augetur, latior 
" evawra, nisi pristina pare simul in os mutavetur, inde 
** ossa calvariac, eodem modo, quo ossa longa diductis 
** epiphysibus, vel quod unum idemque est, raarginibus 
** crescere, liquet, etsi in ossibus, longis sutura epiphyscjs 
" inter et diaphysin non crispetur. 

•* Quo junior igitur infans, eo minus crispa et implexa 
*' sutura, vel ut rectius locjuar, linea cartilaginosa angusta, 
" ossajungens, observatur. Quum vero aucta tctate ossa, 
** crescente cerebro, diducuntur, eorumque crassituiio, 
** adpoSita ^um hiterns?, turn externaB potidsim.uiu tabulae, 
ss 2 



#56 Ori ifte &se'qfHw' Snfiu'h 

If it be asked, for instance, why at thfe 
sutures thei-e'fe^k stitiilg^^r adhesion of ih^dttrk' 
mfl'f^r Interrially ^i\d /pmostetim externally 
than in other parts 6f the skull ? the answer iff/' 
that these membranes with their vessels are 
continued into the sutures, to form conjointly 
the secretory organ, by, which the bones are 
i^xtended. 

If it be asked, why there is a greater vascu- 
larity or an appearance of t)lood-vessels passing 
through the sutures ? it is perfecfly consistent 
wnth this opinion to answer, that the increase- 
of blood goes to this secretory organ, for the 
purpose of the extension of the bones. 

The explanation here offered, accounts also 
for the general obliteration of the sutures after 
a certain period of life ; for the bones having 
then arrived at their full size, the organ for the 
secretion of osseous matter is no longer needed ; 
it shrinks and is absorbed, and the bones, 
gradually coalesce ^ by which a further ad- 

" (Internae euim iiicreinentum citius absolutum. videtur) 
" massa ossea, augetur, iioa potest non esse, quia haec 
*^ crispa suturce forma, qiium quidem nasci coepit, externy, 
" in superficie tamdiu, augeatur, douce tandem ipsa ea 
'' quam maxime impediat, quo minus cerebrum calvariam. 
*' ulterius diducere possit, quod pubertatis tempore accidit. 
" Rarissime hecc ossificatio ad a^tatem virilem usque de- 
" tinetur/*— Soemmcrring do corporis lluinaui rabrica* 
page 212. 



in the Skulls of Animah. 327 

\'antage is derived, that of an accession of 
strength to the cranium at large. 

If any additional argument be necessary in 
support of this opinion,. I may also notice the 
striking analogy, which subsists between the 
separation of one bone of the skull from 
another by a suture ; and that separation which 
exists between the body of a cylindrical bone 
and its epiphysis. They each remain only for 
a certain, length of time ; each allows the in- 
terposition of a secretory organ ; and both 
begin to be obliterated, when the bones with 
which they are connected have completed 
their growth, and their continuance is no 
longer necessary. 



S23 On tlie Moral Injluence of llkiory. 

ON TftE 

MORAL INFLUENCE 

OF 

HISTORY. 

BY 

THE REV. G. WALKER, F. R. Si 

Re^d Feb. 24, 1804, 



JL HE encomiums which history has received 
from writers of the first fame in every age, the 
high rank which it holds among the produc- 
tions of human genius, and the general avidity 
with which it is read, are such arguments of 
intrinsic worth or interest, or both ; that he 
must be hardy indeed who should throw down 
his gauntlet as the adversary of history. If 
such were my intention, it would argue a 
boldness approaching to immodesty, and 
would be a severe condemnation of my own 
conduct through life. In no form of literature 
have I felt a deeper interest -, from few, if 
any, derived greater improvement ^ to none 



On the Mdral Li/lu€?ice opJIistory. 329 

devoted a greater portion of time. I should 
think it not extraivagant to say, that I have 
with pleasure perused a million pages of history 
in the course of my literary life. It cannot 
therefore be supposed, that I mean to detract 
one iota from the real worth, importance, and 
interest of history. But, like the enraptured 
lover, the admirers of history may ascribe to 
her what she has no claim to, viz. that of 
being eminently the instructress of moral ; and 
the questioning this supposed attribute is the 
sole object of the present essay. 

This attribute has certainly been ascribed to 
history by writers of great repute, whose judg- 
ment on any subject ought not lightly to be 
arraigned. But 

JSullius adUictus jur^re in verba magistri — hor. 

is a maxim sanctioned by high authority, 
and essential to the freedom of the human 
mind. — The Jesuit Strada, Lord Bolingbroke, 
Vertot, Dr. Priestley, and many others, if mv 
recollection do not fail me, have considered 
this praise, as appropriately due to histon*. 
But on what grounds I am utterly ignorant, 
for to the best of my remembrance they assume 
it as a datum, which they suppose no one 
would question. Perhaps it is presumed from 
the general interest and acceptance of history* 



530 On the Moral Influence cf History, 

in eveiy age. • Perhaps it is Inferred from such 
logical reasoning as the following. If moral 
be founded in the nature of man, this moral 
must be best learned from the largest and most 
comprehensive view of man; and this view 
of man, it is presumed, can only be found in 
history. Every part of this reasoning is sound 
but one> viz. that history is this large and 
comprehensive view of man. While if history 
be but a very partial view of man, of one 
distinct class of man> and this the most vicious 
and depraved class, and therefore history be 
generally the record of the vices, and hardly 
at all of the virtues of man s and in addition to 
this narrow and partial view, if moral be not 
the object of history, the inference will totally 
fail, and so far as the information of history 
goes, we rtiay be led to think infinitely worse 
of man, than man deserves. — On this ground I 
principally take my stand, but without omitting 
such subsidiary arguments as I think pertinent 
to my subject. 

In order to form a dispassionate judgment 
of the question, it may be necessary to dis- 
cover, if we can, the foundation of that uni- 
versal interest in history, which every age and 
nation- bear testimony to. For, it being an 
acknowledged fact hat history has obtained 
this interest with n: an, it ni^y be presumed. 



On I he Moral fnjluente of iluioty^ 8 3 > 

that this could ncft be, unless history were 
eminently useful as a moral instructor. Now 
1 apprehend that this interest in history has no 
respect to moral at all, but derives itself alto- 
get her from tha,t curiosity of the human mind, 
which impeJst<>; the pursuit of' knowledge of 
ever^ kind, and from the passion for the grand, 
whhout any regard to the useful or the moral. 
13oth of these motives may be associated with 
the useful and the moral, and they m^y and do 
act as independent principles of human nature. 
They are two very powerful stimulants of the 
mind, and do alone account for niany striking 
phenomena of man. To know, and merely to 
know, is the business of man from -the cradle 
to the grave ; it is^ the province of other prin- 
ciples to apply the knowledge, whe^i acquired, 
to >yi>atever purpose. Now if J^istory^ coii-^ 
duced to no other end whatevery i^J^p the 
gratification of this curiosity, man would bq 
impelled to the cgaversation with history ; ibr, 
curious to know every thing,- he could not be 
incurious in a subject which so nauch regards 
the actings of his own species. The useiViJ 
and the moral may be the fruit of this kn(uv% 
kdge, and they may not, but ci^rio^ity would 
alone enforce the eiKjuiry. To this poy^ciliit 
motive is added the passion for the grand, that 
most fascinating and irresibtiblc impulse of the 
T t 



S 32 On the Moral Injiuence of History. 

soul. Now as history exhibits man on what 
we may call a grand scale ; for it is appropri- 
ately the history of the great, the powerful, 
the splendid, of man by the combination of 
many circumstances moving in the face of his 
fellows, as with the energy and majesty of a 
God ; I am persuaded that to this strong at- 
traction we principally owe that unsated in- 
terest and gratification which history admi- 
nisters. We all feel the power of this prin- 
ciple, and know how little it is controuled by 
consideration either of the useful or the moral. 
The awful and the terrible attract, because 
they are grand ; and the awful and the terrible 
are abundantly found in history. 

Philosophers and abstract moralists will not 
allow the character of greatness to any quality 
of man, separate from probity and virtue. 
But history knows no such theory, and the 
common sense of mankind accords with the 
judgment of history. High sounding titles, 
splendid decorations, and a power that ac- 
cumulates the force of millions, will, in despite 
of the philosophy of Horace, Juvenal, or even 
the New Testament, bow the free spirit of 
man, and command a general homage. Even 
the substance of power, without the dress of 
power, would sink into familiarity and con- 
tempt. Take away the diadem the sceptrOj 



On the Moral Influence ofllisiorx). 33!> 

the retinue of guards, the ermine robe, or even 
the wig ; and the king, the senator, the ma- 
gistrate and the judge would lose half their 
dignity, and be almost considered as common 
men. 

But there is^^ real grandeur in the actions 
which history records, which demonstrates a 
superiority of talent, and which even the fas- 
tidium of a cloister must acknowledge. Cyrus, 
Alexander, ITiemistocles, Militiades, Epa- 
minondas, Hannibal, Alfred, Edward III., the 
Black Prince, and Henry V. of England, 
llunniaJes among the Poles, Scanderbeg of 
Epirus, Gustavus Vasa, Gustavus Adolphus 
and Charles XII. of Sweden, Frederic the 
Great of Prussia, even the Barbarians Gen- 
chischan and Tamerlane, and among states- 
men, Pericles, Tully, Richlieu, and the great 
Lord Chatham, all display this grandeur of 
tal'^nt, which, be the moral character what it 
will, enforce admiration, and constitute the 
charm, whi<;h interests the reader of their 
story. Nor will the manly spirit of England, 
with all its laudable indignation of his insults 
aixl his crimes, refuse this tribute to Bonaparte 
himscli. 

Here and in the active spirit of curiosity lies 
t]\c whole secret jOf that interest, which all 
feci in history.'^^^^^Ve ?eek not for morale hi$ 
' T t 2 



334 Oh the Moral Infiuencc ofHisfortfl 

fcry interitls it not .; and what moral may be 
extracted fit)m It, lies too deep for the herd of 
readers; and the historian, actuated by the 
same motives and spirit as his reader, obtrudes 
not the latent moral upon him. It is to gratify 
the thirst of knowledge, the knowledge of what 
inari'has acted on the great theatre of this world 
of ours, and to gratify the passion for grand dis- 
play, grandeurofstyfe aiid grandeur of talent, that 
the historian writes, and never fails to attract 
a host of readers ; and the developement of this 
theory will be found very materially toaifect 
the discussion of the question in view. 

But I deny not that histoiy subserves to 
many important uses. These uses it become^ 
'me to notice, and such is my own affection for 
history, that I wish I could add every praise 
wdiich its most passionate admirer contends for. 
These uses chiefly apply to speeifiq characters 
and stations, but little enter into the contem- 
plation of the many, and can hardly af all' be 
reaped by them. The soldier, the statesman, 
and the philosopher constitute the three classes 
to whom history appropriately addresses her 
lessons, ^ha to them she Is of special Im- 
portance, and must be a source not only of 
amusement, but of the rnost valuable instruc- 
tion. In the detail of military affairs, of the 
various operations and manoeuvres, which enter 



On the Moral Influence of Ilislori), 5 5 j 

into the practice of war, of battles, sieg^s^ 
marches, counter-marches, blockades, and en- 
campments, the soldier may derive much va- 
luable nistmction, and a general insight into 
the best exercise of his profession. In the 
history of *the negotiations, the treaties and 
intrigues of governments, the divisions of 
nations, their connections and dependencies, 
the political conduct of great and leading mi- 
nisters, the statesman is to acquire that know- 
ledge and experience, which are essentially 
necessary to him in the discharge of his public 
duties. While in contemplating the revolution 
of human affairs, the rise and decline of 
nations, with the^auses that have contributed 
thereto, the advancement of some to civiliza- 
tion, science and arts, the relapse of others into 
barbarism, the progress of general knowledge, 
the influence of climate, government and 
laws upon the character of man j the philo- 
sopher will be enabled to derive much of wise, 
useful and moral information. V> 

The field of this application is indeed ex- 
ceedingly limited as to the number of its sub- 
jects; but it may be urged, that the high rank 
in life of those individuals, to whom histo^Y 
thus addresses her especial instruction, amply 
compensates for their paucity ; and it may 
farther be urged, that science, of whatever kin47 



336 Oil the Moral Infiuencc^of History. 

addresses herself to all, that every human beivig 
has an hiterest in the speculations of the soldier, 
the statesman, and the philosopher, has a right 
to appreciate their talents and their services, 
and therefore .to participate in all the sources 
of their peculiar acquirements. This no one 
can or ought to controvert, but in order that 
history shall minister to this high cultivation of 
the mind, it is necessary that it be the subject 
ot our serious study and reflection. It is not a. 
slight and superficial perusal, it is not the mere 
knowledge that such a general existed, that he 
gained such a battle, won such a town, con- 
quered such a province, that will suffice ; but 
we must explore the co-operating causes of his 
, success, whether he owed it to his own judicious 
skill and improvement of the favourable cir- 
cumstances which occurred, or it was merely 
9rrkind of good fortune; we must trace his 
progress on the map, and acquaint ourselves as 
much as possible with the local circumstances 
of the countries which are the theatre of his 
warfare ; we mu^t enquire into the motives 
and criticise the;wisdom of his various move- 
ments, know^ his ^discipline, his .tactics, and 
contrast them with those of his enemy ; but 
above cill, to estimate his character, we should 
carefully" observe^ hoiw }ie won the affections, 
possessed himself of the confidence, and 



Oh MMoraMriflucnce of History, 3 37 

breathed his own heroic soul into that of his 
army ;-' dh'^ 'negligent of, ai'id ' incompetent to 
both, sunk his troops into feebleness and 
dastardy. In order to acquire from history a 
scientific knowledge of politics, we- must 
itudy the general character, as Well as the 
peculiar manners and customs bfthef> Nations 
and people whom it treats of, the nature of the 
government and the physical strength of fhbse 
countries with which the political act'^ors of the 
times are connected ; we must review ajraln 
and again* thi varied 'cdndiict of eminent 
statesmen-;' the pdlic)^'' the wisdbniy the pa^ 
triotism and the virtue x)f their schemes; the 
means by which they carried them into (ex- 
ecution ; the prudence of their financial -ar- 
rangements ; in fine, the general system and 
tendency of their 'domestic and foreign policy; 
whether like a^'meteor 'if be temporary anc^ 
fleeting, or like tne oeconomy of nature, per- 
manent and comprehensive. In the moral 
philosophy of history, it is a more nice and de- 
licate task, amidst a variety of apparent, de- 
lusive and often contradictory causes, to elicit 
those which can alone condlice to the stabilitv, 
independence and true prosperity of nations, 
and upon which the advancement of mankind 
in knowledge, virtue and happiness absolutely 
depends ; to penetrate a thick^and turbid mass. 



.$3;8| 0?i fheJUoral Influence ofHistortj, 

end disco\^r tt^etrue theory of hurrian nature 5 
that seemingly latent but indestructible princi- 
ple. of moral, which confounds the (^eep and 
well-pkrtned schemes of designing- selfish po- 
}icy, which ^survives the wreck of xontending 
empiresj^ and .th(3^ wide-spreading desolation 
of barbarian conquest, which fromr the ycxj 
•'r^ve of ignorance,^ superstition and vice rege- 
nerates man. . In this way history may certainly 
be studied to great advantage, and where there 
is time adequate thereto, and where there are 
talents prepared and cultivated .tor th js purpose, 
every human being may derive from Jaistory a 
gemero-us gratification and much soHd benefit. 

There is another vaiuablepurp9se to which 
histtory subserves, in teaching to man the mag- 
nitude of his powers, and the inexhausted 
resources on which in every emergency and 
difficulty, exertion, fortitude and magnanitnity 
have to depend. This is a lesson which man 
needs, and su(Bciep,t to confer on history all 
the dignity and praise which are ascribed to 
her. The most vicious as well as the most 
honourable characters recorded in .history ex- 
hibit this lesson 1;<?: man. The fortitude, the 
perseverance, the unsubdued spirit, with which 
"both ancient and modern heroes keep on their 
course through the most formidable difficulties, 
summon to their aid those powers, which trial 
4 



On the^ Moral Infiufnce of Hisiorij, ^ 39 

%nd riecefeisity cotikl^ • fflone have discovered to 
therri, arid by the^ vigorous and steady appli- 
catioh of which they triumph over every re- 
sistance, and attain their desired object, unfold 
a view of man, which could only be learned 
from the grand and extended display of human 
talent which history exhibits. This I consider 
as by far the mbst valuable use to which his- 
tory-subserves; and certainly apph'cable as a 
lesson to a wider range of extent than the 
former uses which I have noticed. 

But to the far greater part of mankind, who, 
from the destiny of their lot are assigned to dif^ 
ferent ptifposes, who either cannot, or think 
that they cannot, penetrate the mysteries of 
the soldier or the statesman, or follow the phi- 
losophic moralist in his deep and abstract inves- 
tigationsi these concessions do by no means 
apply. Occupied in the common concerns of 
the world, they have neither the time, the in- 
clination, nor the abilities which enable them 
to derive from histor}^ these important ad- 
vantages, nor are they invited and encouraged 
to the attempt by their more favoured supe- 
riors. If they peruse history at all, it is merely 
as an idle and passing amusement, or to ac- 
quire a cursory knowledge of a few leading 
tacts and dates, in order that they may not 
appear utterly ignorant of former times ; a 
u u 



f^340 py^^t/iTuMqr^l Injiapicc of History. 

species of knowledge, which can neither, much 
improve , the understanding, better the, he^ft, 
jior contribute to one valuable end, Perhaps I 
am not wrong if. it he iny farther Opinion, that 
to uncultivated and, unfeeling, readers of this 
description, history may not only be, an un- 
profitable, but in its epn&equenices an injurious 
occupation. Some m^y dqem it onlya pleas- 
ing illusion of the imagination, but I hold it as 
a- truth, that the yirtue,< which constitutes at 
, once the ornamept and felicity of man, has 
most of the graces, in her train, and amongst 
these, that modesty, which , declines a proud 
shew to. the world, is a distinguished jand,-ii>r 
separable attendant. It is therefore, that we 
rarely meet with virtue in the splendid display 
of history,,, whether in the court, or in the 
camp, in the ^enate,;qr in the fQrum,;,or e^yen 
in the jacademic grove, or, where §hfe might a^t 
least be expected, at the tribunals of ;i^?^ecutiv^ 
justice. Andit is therefore that the -vices of 
niari . are thought \o preponderate over hi^ 
virtues, bemuse jVistpry is littje other than a 
record -pf his, follies,, -Jii^ ci^im^js and hfe misery ^ 
Whether we take a retrospective view: of past 
ages, or consult the present history of the 
world, what have we generally presented to 
our view, but one ^ disgusting series of the 
Ji^ayiest calamities and the most sho^kipg 



Ofi ihcMorat Ifi/lu<f7H'e of Jlistori/, 341 

ncofty'tlmt can afftict or degrade hurilajiity ^ 
Wc hardly turn over a page, which is wot 
crimsoned with blood, or j)ol luted Vs'ith foul 
crimes. Uarbarous violence, sanguinary war^, 
horrid devastation^, merciless pcrscouribns, 
murders, rapes, poisotis and' Assassinations, 
Jordh^ UTants trampling-upon- and insulting the 
rights of human nature,'* and abject slaves 
crouching beneath the yoke of ^ withering 
despotismi which from age to age- has gone 
cMi debasing the huwwin character, jand blast- 
ing 'every rising effort of geaiius and virtue. — 
Such' are the scenes which: history chieflv'^x- 
hibjifSlo our vkw. To the reader,- therefbr<^, 
Jwho looks perhaps solely for amiusement, and 
with no view to any spe<:ific instruction or ad- 
vantage, such a picture of the debasement and 
misery of his fellow creatures can aflfordiio gra 
tifkatiotj. ^Vhere the heart is tiot strangeiy 
corrupted, its most natural impression must be 
that of pain and disgust. Who can peruse the 
bloody proscriptions of a Roman triumvirate, 
the I devastating march of a Genchischan or a 
Tamerlane, the barbarities of a Mexican ^ 
Peruvian conquest, the systematic cold-blooded 
cruelties of a Spanish Inquisition, withoivttiie 
most painful emotions of indignation and ab-i 
horrence ? The frequent conten>pltftian -of su.'^ii 
scenes> in which human nature •jVj*d^VrfT«i<»^ed, 
u u 2 



;3 4? On th^Moia I In^'iencc of His ton/. 

;and ytjt feVv, if any, better i§pecimens of human 
jcbavacters are exhibited, must have a sitror% 
'tendency to corrupt the heart of the reader ; to 
chill all the warm affections of his innocent 
youth, to induce a cold,. Illiberal and misan- 
thropic spirit, or, as if alhi^esistance to the ge- 
;neral current, were impotent, to: reconcile' jhim 
to a partnership in the selfishness and depravity 
of man. , For, as the reader becomes- more and 
-more conversant with, the continued tale of 
human folly and wickedj.aiessj his estimati^ii of 
his spegies must be lowered, and his huniane 
and ben;evolent priiiciple^ impaired.- ..jlt';r^r 
quires indeed a strong mi'nd, and standing^ipon 
strong principles, such as the world will not 
teach him, to resist this^ most malignant qf all 
impressions. Now and then iqdeed, it must be 
allowed that some characters arise, such "as 
Alfred. — rr-What ! does history pause at th^ 
mention of this single name, and in her length- 
ened catalogue of kings and legislators and 
boasted heroes, has she no fellow worthy to 
place beside thee ? Then stand alone, thou 
glory of the British isle, and be thou alone, 
that verdant spot in the wide waste of an 
Arabian desert, on ^^hich the wearied and 
disgusted eye, can gaze with delight ; and at 
the mention of thy name may the heart be 
warmed anew, and re-excited tQ every virtuous 



On tke Moral Influence of History. \W^ 

:a?piring, IJut even thou, with all thy wonderful 
, virtues, polislied in the midst of barbarism, 
learned in the midst of ignorance, religious in 
the midst of superstition, and on a. throne the 
.father and >tlie friend of thy people, art byta* 
, tjie- bright , p^eteor, which for a moment illu- 
minates the; dark fjice of night, ^nd isr^oon 
.obliterated and lost in the returning glootit.u> 
.• When, we farther observe, that the prospect 
.9>f, the vice and misery which has at all times 
.^xis^ed, according to the report of history, hj^ 
le4 even men of superior discerHment and deep 
reflection into religious doubts and sceptipisra, 
assuredly no little danger in,- this respect is.tobt 
apprehended to the light and superficial reader. 
For, if any thing can make him doubt of;the 
superintending agency of a wise and good 
Providence^, it is certainly the vi?\v of those 
dismal tragedies which are continually taking 
place on the theatre of the world ^ wherein the 
principal actors not only escape with apparent 
impunity, butTcap the reward oftheit wick^- 
cdness, wherein suffering innocence and virtue 
are trampled on and insulted, while triumphant 
villany loads it with an unpitying and savage 
rule. 

It is true that these conclusions against the 
moral government of the wprld, from the seem- 
ing triumphs of vice, arid> which terminate ia 



544 On the Moral Influence lyfllisfbrij. 

^o unfavourahk a judgment both of 06(1 and 
man, admit of a v^i*y satisfactory 'd Ad dignified 
reply. But the argmnent lies too deep, and is 
of a character toa abstract and sublime for 
common minds; and history furnishes no ail- 
tidote to the poison, no argument to him^ who 
«WduM vvisli to retain his good opinion both of 
God^dnd man. The man, who f6rms his judg- 
ment of hum^n character and of human enjoy- 
ment froiii the representation of history, com- 
mits himself to a supposed insructor, who cer- 
^tain-Iy does not, and who probably means not 
to givei him dny adequate informatfcn of either. 
His Indeed is a very different objiect, with *^ery 
littte, rf any, iiioral investigation whatever/ to 
tell you what one part, and that infinitely the 
smallest part of the human race, have acted on 
the stage of Hfe ; a class of men, who generally 
in the very outset abandon all virtuous restraint, 
or in the prosecution of their viev^^s perceive a 
Icind of necessity of quitting so confined a path; 
and if they have happiness in view, seek it where 
God and nature never meant it to be found. 
Who is competent 'to estimate the quantum of 
virtue 'Ctf- of quiet <^njoyment of an hundred 
million of subjects of the Roman empire from 
the history of Tiberius, Caligula c-r Nero ? 
Are their profusion, their libertinism, their 
jcraekies, or those of their parasites and in- 



On the Moral Influence af.'Histury. 345 

formers, or of the whole Patrician and eques- 
trian orders, or of the Roman armies, the. stan- 
dard of character through the extent of that 
vast empire? And how impotent even of mischief 
must their vices be, great as these vices were, 
when we contemplate the millions whom all 
their wantonness of rule could but lightly ap- 
proach, whose very obscurity was their pre- 
servative at once from being corrupted by their 
example, and crushed by their oppression ? 
Be pleased to recollect what I before observed, 
that virtue is naturally modest and retired, 
while vice is impudent and obtruding ; it is of 
the character of the letter, therefore, to seize 
almost the whole field of prominent and am- 
bitious action to itself ; and to this field history 
almost wholly confines herself, while she either 
knows not, or deigns, not to notice the quiet 
life of the unambitious many,' .with whom, 
however, both virtue and happiness are moro 
likely to be found. 

. No mistake is more common, though none 
more injurious both to religion and morals, than 
the false idea of happiness which the pipud 
display of wealth and power before our eyes, 
and the exhibition of hardly any thing else in 
liistory, occasion. Yet the only happiness 
which deserves the name, 13 within the reach 
of |he raanv, as well as the few, it is derived 

3 



'346 On the Moral Triflucnce ofJIistor\/. 

fromthe temper of the soul, more than from the 
- external condition of iife, and finds a field of ex- 
crcise^suited to this:temper, in the calm enjoy* 
ments of domestic, friendly and social inter- 
course. But to this indubitable truth the his- 
torian, pays no attention, and therefore affords 
no as^fstance to the common reader, wherebv 
he may correct his false estimate of things, and 
separate the shewy parade of triumphant crime 
from sincere enjoyment. It must ¦ indeed be 
admitted that in. some rare instances a mo- 
ralizing historian vv:ill let you into the secret 
•which the pride of successful wickedness would 
hide from the world. .. If scrutinizing pictures 
of that internal wretchedness, which, like the 
vulture of Rome, thus gnaws at the heart of 
conscious crime, were oftener exhibited by 
historians, like. to that of Tiberius in his retreat 
at Caprea, and of Charles the IXth of France^ 
and of that monster Herod, called the Great, 
in the decline of their health and life, history 
would be more useful, a retributive justice as 
the issue of conduct would appear to have 
moreiplace in the world than the first face of 
things countenances, the moral principles of 
the reader would be less endangered, and few, 
methinks, would barter the peaceful inno- 
cence even of a cottage, for the titled grandeur 



.r(t 



On the Moral Injliicnce of Ulstorij. 347 

., f)f |:papy pf tl)e he rqes of history, if therewith 
xpyst t>e incurred tJie penalty of their misery. 
- - It. is also another consideration, and which 
1)0 pb;losopliical essayist ou^ht ever to be 
ashai^ied of bringing forward, in any place, or 
l)etQ;;q^ any ai|dicnc;c>,, that if there be a truth in 
that theology, which considers this life as the 
triad of virtue, the"'ne'3rt as Tfs rcWard ; the 
historian suggests,, no ^pch instruction, nor is it 
biy l;iini that the reader will h^ gu'ar.ded agai^ist 
conclusions which are alike reproachful to nian 
and to the maker of jn^n; it is nqt from the 
histprian that he-^will imbibe those more ex- 
tended and subHmer views, which are cpn» 
splatory to himself, and gloriqvvsly vindicate the 
ways of Qod to man. 

There .is this fartljiei* disadvantage to be ap- 
prehended , from the perusal of history, that 
whereas we r meet, with certain cljxarapter^j^in 
which good and bad qualities arp,SQ intimately 
blended, that it is difficult to discriminate be- 
twcen them ; and through we are sensible that 
all is not sound, yet what is attractive so in- 
sinuates its colour into the whole, rand the; 
union of magnanimity and grandeur with all 
so captivates us, that we come insensibly to 
interest ourselves in their success \ and as their 
history is more expand,ed, . our admiration is 
more and more excited; we mibibe their 

XX 



348 On the Moral Iiijiuence of History, 

views, sympathize with them in their difficulties 
and dangers, triumph with them in their 
success ; and become at length so dazzled 
with the splendor of their exploits, and the 
elevation to which they rise, that if we are not 
absolutely enamoured with their very vices, 
yet they are in a great measure lost to our view. 

" They have no faults, or \\q no faults can spy," 

we acquire a false notion of heroism uncon- 
nected with virtue; and the detestation of 
crime, perhaps even of the most horrid mag- 
nitude, is so lessened by the lustre of successful 
greatness, as to plead for its excuse, and 
dispose us to consider it as the necessary and 
unavoidable consequence of the circumstances 
in which they are engaged. And it is truly 
wonderful to observe, how historians of every 
age have contributed to this delusion by the 
unjust applauses which they have bestowed 
upon certain characters and actions. The 
heroes of their pens have in general been the 
great destroyers of mankind ; those wno have 
ravaged kingdoms, overthrown empires, and 
thinned the human race. Men have been 
deified and sainted, not for the goodness, 
but for the greatness, of their exploits; not 
for their endeavours to civilize and improve 
the state of mankind by the introduction of 



On the Moral Injlucnce ofllhtorxj. 549 

mild and equitable laws, and the cultivation 
of the arts of peace; but for an inordinate 
and selfish spirit of ambition and aggrandise- 
ment. The reign of just and peaceful so- 
vereigns, which, like the tranquil seasons of 
nature, impart health and life and chear- 
fulness to every thing around, has been re- 
garded as but an inferior and secondary object 
of their attention, valued perhaps most, as it 
renovates the energies of a nation, and fits it 
for the ambitious views of a military successor. 
No ! it is the mighty troublers of the earth, the • 
hurricanes of proud war and conquest which 
deform the fair face of nature, which in their 
wasteful progress sweep whole nations to the 
grave, that has been too much the theme of 
historic applause and admiration. When we 
behold the title of Great conferred on such 
men as Alexander, Caesar, Lewis the XlVth, 
or even Peter of Muscovy, every moral and 
humane mind must reprobate the profanation 
of the attribute, and lament the folly of the 
world, w^hich can join in the applause of what 
it ought severely to condemn, and dignify 
what .merits it$ abhorrence and execration. 
But the common vulgar of mankind too easily 
adopt the very prejudices which are their ruin, 
and cajUght with, the whis^tling.of a name, faj| , 
down before and worship the very beast that 
X X 1 



350 On the Moral Influence of History. 

. is to devour them. Thus, by the false colours 
in which such characters are exhibited, the 
moral judgment and the moral taste of many 
a reade'f'is most deplorably perverted. If 
romances and 'novels have erred in. raising the 
notion of human virtue ?ibove its level, history 
has more dangerously erred in the low appre- 
ciation bf the human character, and associating 
it with every vice. 

From the heroes of antiquity have sprung 
the race of the wasteful conquerors of nations, 
the disturbers of the peace of man. Achilles 
begat Alexander and his turbulent successors ; 
Alexander begat Julius Csesar, ^Vith the long 
and horrid series of Roman emperors ; and 
the bewitchery of Ca:!sar's character will never 
cease to propagate the lust of overbearing'- do- 
minion, without one end in view, but the 
mere fame of extended empire and despotic 
sway. To this we have owed the embryo at- 
tempt of Charles V. of Austria, and of Lewis 
XIV. of France ; and at this moment owe, 
more perhaps than to any' other cause, the 
present troubler of the world. An ample 
career of solid glory lay before him; but the 
ghost of Cassar and the dream of more than 

¦ Roman empire appear to haunt his sleeping 
and his waking hours; they have turned him 
from all honourable course, nor will suffer him 

4 ' ' 



On th€;M(n*al Infiuence of Historxj. 551 

to pause, until, to serve some wise ends of qn 
avqnging providence, he b;c permitted for a 
while to spread desolation around ; or fall at 
once, himself and his dcluiled country, a mighty- 
ruin, a just but an inadequate atonement to art 
offended and harassed world. 

Such is the aggregate of immoral impi*<?s^ ion, 
to which history, as it has hitherto been, con- 
ducted, does conduce. I am aware of thq 
high repute* which history has obtained in 
every ag^ and ;iation, and that I have a general 
and even a liberal prejudice to resi,st. History 
has been considered as among the sublime 
productions' of human genius. As a work of 
genius I have not arraigned her, I can even 
with Cicero, allow her to be a MagistraMorum, 
of manners .certainly, and of moral in some 
degree ; and I have so allowed her, but only 
to a select few; while to the many I contend 
tliat she is a dangerous and immoral instructor ; 
in which, perhaps, Cicero would in part have 
have . agreed \yith me, if he had taken the 
many into his contemplation. But we should 
in many^ respects have differed; our morals, 
our politics, our religion, would not altogether 
have harmonized, and. Cicero would have 
highly hated piany.of those evil tendei^cies of 
histon i) whJ9h 1 have assigned the highest 
in portance. . tlistory has powerful attracfeipns, 



'0D\ 



On the Moral Influence of History. 

and I feel them equally with her warmest 
friend ; nor have I lightly and inconsiderately 
charged her ; nor as an advocate, who having 
adopted a cause, no matter what or why, 
thinks that he must conjure up every thing that 
is plausible in favour of his cause, and urge 
every thing that is possible to the prejudice of 
the caiise which he opposes. What I have 
written, I have honestly written. Difference 
of opinion is to be expected. But as truth, 
not disputation, is the first object of this so- 
ciety, let him who differs, review the charges 
seriatim. The charges are orderly arranged, 
they are not mingled in one confused mass, 
and may in order be confuted. An indiscri- 
minate reply, which repels in the gross, and 
attends to nothing minutely, can lead to no 
definite and accurate conclusion . 

In deference therefore to that respect which 
history claims, it is admitted that history may 
be perused with great advantage by those who 
bring to the perusal a proper and well-directed 
spirit of enquiry, and that the loss of history 
would be an irreparable loss. But it is con- 
tended that to reap these advantages, those 
requisites are necessary which the many do not 
and cannot possess, and without' which they 
cannot be guarded against the ill impression 
and ill tendencies, which, in regard to them at 



On the Moral Influence ofllislqnj. 553 

least, I have charged to the account of history. 
While in the page of history we contemplate 
the degraded state to which vice, ignorance, 
and the dominion of false and illiberal pre- 
judices have so greatly subjected man, it does 
indeed, rcquirq a strong and well prepared 
mind to look on this degraded picture of hu- 
manity, without having, our own principles of 
integrity and benevolence weakened and per- 
haps subverted i or our confidence in, the su- 
perintendence of an over-ruling Providence 
endangered. All the events of histor^r which 
are opprobrious to humanity will, by t^e judi- 
cious reader, be referred to their pro])er cause, 
to the corruption, not to the deprayitv of 
human nature ; that -easy refuge of men, who 
are themselves corrupted ; nor in the sentence 
of one,, or, a, thousand villains, will he involve 
the whole human race ; and thus by a rash and 
unjust inference, rob man at once of his God, 
and of all generous confidence in the work of 
God. In fine, the fascinations of splendid 
crime should not screen the criminal, but the 
natural abhorrence of wickedness, risino- in 
proportion to the enormity of its /examples, 
should strengthen the virtuous inclination of 
the reader's heart. To read history with truth 
and with advantage, the nicest discrimination 
of causes is often requisite. Folly and error 



S 5 4 (hi the Moral Influence of Hisfoiy 

are frequently as prominent in the page as de- 
liberate bad intention, but by the historian and 
his reader the deceived are rudely confounded 
with the deceiver, the seduced with the se- 
ducer ; v^^hile matty of the most dWrvyhelming 
calamities which have fallerf on mankind may 
with great truth, t)fe referred to ah honest, 
though mistaken, principle of Virtu56;''This 
might be illustrated by many memorable ex- 
amples, but to adduce these would lead hie 
into too wide a field, and exceed the limits 
which I apprehend are prescribed to nie. I 
may be allowed however to observe, that in- 
attentive to thisjustdiscrimination, nist6'ry and 
its readers often pass the most erroneous judg- 
ments, condemn where they should pity, en- 
fiame where they should instruct, excite na- 
tional antipathies, where national sympathies 
would be the wiser and more salutary appli- 
cation, and authorize the most pernicious of 
all conclusions, the moral depravity of man, 
where in the intention of the actors the moral 
character of man is most prominent. 

Vice and atheism are certainly unnatural to 
man. Vice, in man as a part of the ge- 
neral system, is a state of great disorder, of- 
fensive as a spectacle, and so far as it extends, 
operates to the destruction of this part of the 
system -, while in every other part of the ge- 



On the Moral Influence of Hislorij. 355 

neral system the most regular uninterrupted 
order and harmony are observed. It is con- 
trary therefore, both to the general order of 
nature, and to the order of man, which is 
confessed by the odium which the common 
sense of mankind annexes to it, and by the 
aversion with which man contemplates its 
ruinous effects. — Atheism is yet more unna- 
tural, for every character of nature is to 
man the proclamation of a God, of a wise and 
designing author. But independent of the 
scenery of nature, in the contemplation only of 
man himself, to deny a God, is to deny 
himself. For, man is certainly an effect, the 
commencement of his being is a demonstration 
of it ; but an eflbct in the very term acknow- 
ledges a cause, and an adequate cause, and the 
denial of the cause of his being is not less 
absurd, than the denial of his own being itself. 
We should pronounce the man an ideot or mad, 
who doubted his own existence, but to be 
uniform and consistent, this the atheist ought 
to do. The attribute of ideotism or madness 
would not be increased thereby. 

These observations are not impertinent or 
irrelevant ; they arise out of the view which we 
have taken, and prelude what is the summary 
of the charges which 1 have brought against 
historv," that it is one principal cause of the 



356 Oil the Moral Influence of History, 

increase both of vice and atheism inlhe world. 
It docs not repel the charge, that liistory is 
abliorrent to such intention ; this I am as 
firmly persuaded of as the greatest admirer of 
history -can be, but the more I consider the 
subject, I am also the more persuaded that 
the charge is just. If vice in a high degree, 
and atheism altogether, be unnatural to man. 
there must be some singular cause of the pro- 
pagation of both. 1 will ask. a few plain 

questions. 

Is the exhibition of human character in 
history a fair representation of human nature ? 
Is it the representation of man at all, consi- 
dered in the abstract ? Is it not the portrai.t 
of a single class of men, who, from very ob- 
vious causes are the most vicious and depraved 
of men ? Considered as the picture of man, 
is it not a horrid and disgustful one ? And 
yet, as history appears to treat of man in every 
aire and nation, is it not by manv considered 
to be the picture of human nature ? Can this 
fail to have the most malignant effect, to break 
down the human mind, and reconcile it, tq 
vice, as being in the order and course of 
human nature ? Irritated by the^e passions, 
which introduce vice at all, man is corrupted 
beyond redemption by what he conceives to b<;, 
general example; for, i^t is in the manner , of gcw 



On the Moral Influence of History, 557 

jicral ilJ example that history acts upon 4he 
mind of the reader. Those who, from their 
introduction on the stage presume that they are 
destined to be tlic privileged managers of the 
human drama, read the story of their prede- 
cessors ; the part which they have acted they 
receive as the part which thcimsclves are to act j 
the tempting allurements of wealth and powei^ 
and grandeur spread their charms before them i 
the delicate question of right and w^rong hardly 
occurs .to them, or w^ith i-^ot sufficient power to 
turn them from their course ; theirs id^is to com- 
mand, of the multitude to obey ; and hence 
the constant repetition of the same crimes, a 
kind of hereditary succession of injustice vio- 
lence, fraud, broken faith, cruelty, and all the 
ill-featured progeny of wide-wasting ambition. 
History is more a change of names, than of 
action and character, and what in her record is 
favourable to the general welfare of man, is 
rarely to be ascribed to the efforts, or even 
to the concurrence of the great actors ; but to 
the operation of seemingly fortuitous circum^^ 
stances, to the general impulse of the neglected 
many, to the re-action against crime itself, when 
pushed to an extreme beyond human bearance, 
and what is the most true, though the least 
acknowledged, to the counteraction of a being 
behind the curtain, who diverts the counsels 
Yy 2. 



358 On the Moral Influence of History . 

of a wicked policy to an end, which is the 
most remote from the thoughts and the most 
remote from the wish of the proud actors. The 
revival of letters and arts, the deliverance of 
man from the most abject and oppressive 
slavery, that of Papal Rome, was not owing 
to the great men of the day, but to obscure in- 
dividuals, whom, but for the magnitude of the 
events, history would not have noticed. But 
these splendid reverses succeeded to a dark and 
dismal gloom of more than twelve hundred 
years ^ and in spite of all their benign influence, 
the same fell ambition, which sweeps before it 
in one general ruin, letters and arts and huma- 
nity, still goes on; and the fate of Europe, I 
may say, of the world, depends at this moment 
Q\\ the resistance of one gallant, enlightened, 
and comparatively virtuous nation ; in one 
awful struggle it is soon to be decided, whether 
man shall not be driven back by the wild 
spirit of conquest to the same debased and 
horrid state from which he was happily re- 
deemed. 



( 359 ) 

REFLEXIONS 

ON 

HISTORY 

AND ON 

Historians, Ancient and Modern, 

SY 

JOHN HOLLAND. 

Read Dec. 30th, t8o> 



X ERHAPS on examination, it will be found 
that no kind of writing is more ancient than 
history. Originally it seems that the records 
of different nations were drawn up in a sort of 
verse or measured prose for the sake of being 
the more interesting, and the better remem- 
bered. These historical odes were probably 
recited or sung at public festivals or on days of 
rejoicing. The next form which history as- 
sumed may be called the dramatic, and was 
intended to be a faithful transcript of actual 
conversation. Moses is the oldest known his- 
torian, who adopted this kind of writing, in 



560 Tic flex ions on History^ S^c. 

which be was followed by those who com- 
posed the Jewish bistoriail scriptures, and 
with no small success, by the Evangelists, espe- 
cially by Luke, the author of the book entitled 
the Acts of the apostles. 

"Without doubt it is a mode which captivates 
the attention and enables the imagination to 
form a picturp of events and persons. But if 
it were ¦gcneraliy*' used, or by writers of no 
extraordinary capacity or genius, it might 
become wearisome to readers imbrued with 
curiosity and eager for information. Hence, 
possibly, Herodotus has been called the father 
of history, because he was one of the first to 
reduce the tales or traditions, which existed 
before his time into a narrative form. But 
sinqe-vhe (it is Ayell known) wrote to amuse and 
gratify the Greeks, at whose public games his 
w^orks, dedicated to the nine Muses^ were re- 
cited, so it became necessary for him to adorn 
his writings wifh ,the beauties of style, and 
>vith the charms of eloquence. Then almost 
cycry thing depended upon public speaking. 
•^Vhilst state " affairs were never discussed in 
any other way,; (he very principles of science 
were communicated with the greatest effect J^y 
tlxe most popular orators. It was not there- 
fore . surprising, that the historians/both of 
Greece and Rome displayed their talents for 



licjlaxions on Hislori " 3t)l 

rhetoric by inventing speeches for favorite or 

distinguished characters*. Though Herodotus 

perhaps first adopted this mode of writing, yet 

he does not seem to have carried it to such an 

extreme as some of his successors. The ha- 

ran^uji:s which he probably composed, are much 

shouOei^^nd less elaborate than those which are 

found in Thucydides, or in Xenophon. Such 

a style of co^iiposition however, was certainlv 

faulty, and by no means consistent with ihat 

love of truth, which ought ever to guide the 

historian's pen. Still it has been thought diat 

Polybius, ip ei^deavouring to avoid such an 

error, has committed an opposite one, and 

written not o;^ly in an unadorned, but in a 

repulsive manner. If Justin be excepted, 

scarcely any ancient historian may be allowed 

to havc; preserved the proper medium betw^Qo^ 

tl)C simplicity fof narration, and the artifice of 

rhetoric, or to have united eloquence and 

correctness with veracity. This indeed is but 

the abridgment ^md the translation of a larger 

\york, whiclj, if it had been his lot to compose, 

he .too ipightl^ave blended the rhetorician with 

tiie narrator. ) ^^, , 

„ Among the Roman historians, no ouc seciijt> 
more to have offended against the simplicitv ol" 
narration, to. have mixed his own sentiments. 

and prejudices with his works, or to have been 

4 



362 Reflexions on History^ &V. 

more solicitous for the reputation of being 
esteemed a maker of eloquent harangues than 
Sallust. As of his prefaces it has been sarcas- 
tically observed, that they appear to have been 
prefixed by blunder to his two histories, so it 
is certain, that either would suit the descrip- 
tion of any corrupted, degenerate, ^r venal 
period. Yet since Sallust lived in the times of 
which he has written an account, it is candid 
to suppose, that he has faithfully represented 
the ideas of the orators whose speeches he has 
given. But the uniformity of his style incon- 
trovertibly establishes his claim to the compo- 
sition. 

With more simplicity Cassar, in his Com- 
mentaries, has imitated Xenophon, the natural 
sweetness of whose style, has obtained him the 
nai^e of the Athenian Bee. Yet, without 
doubt, the Roman has exhibited traces of the 
same fault, common to m>ost ancient historians, 
of making orations for others. Excellent too, 
as in many respects the writings both of Livy 
and of Tacitus may justly be deemed, they 
are deserving of blame on a similar account. 
The copious magnificence of the one is indeed 
so complete a contrast to the sententious bre- 
vity of the other, that perhaps an historical 
style equally remote from both extremes, would 
be superior to either. — ^As the epitome of 



Ite/exio7is mi History, ffc. ^S^ 

Floras nvglit deserve more praige, if the style 
had be^n less ornamented, so the Roman his- 
tory ^f Velleius Paterculus would have been 
mo.'e highly esteemed for its judicious accu- 
ri-cy, if the author had not bestowed the most 
Tjauseous adulations on the gloomy despot 
Tiberius, and on his hated tyrannical favorite 
Sejanus. 

But the qualifications of ditferent historians 
both ancient and modern, have been delineated 
in so judicious and pleasing a manner by 
Ilayjey, in his Poetical Essay on History, that 
it seems the less necessary to enlarge on this 
part of the subject. Few modern writers 
have chosen to imitate the ancients in the iti- 
vention of harangues for generals and statesmen. 
Even the elegant and classical Littleton, by 
adopting such a method, has not been able to 
impart sufficient interest to bis history of Eng^ 
land, during the reign of Henry the Second, 
or to have prevented the perusal of his otlief- 
wise useful and excellent work, from becom- 
ing a tiresome occupation. Though the taitc of 
modern times concurred with the discovery d( 
printing, and the revival of literature, to re- 
quire from the historian a less artificial, and a 
less fictitious mode of writing, yet with no 
better effect, with no greater advantage has 
the argumentative b^ert sometimes substituted 
z z 



,561 Reflex ions on II is ton/, SCc. 

ibr the rhetoricu'l style. 'The historian, in Im 
-Study, has endeaybured tq conjecture the 
motives which have influenced at le^st the 
leaders of contending and opposite parties, till 
he has imagined himself intimately acquainted 
Avith their reasonings and apologies, and a^ 
well able to transmit them to succeeding time's, 
as if he had been a member of their councils, 
or invested with the divine privilege of know- 
ing the heart. But great events, it is well 
known, have frequently been occasioned ;0r 
produced by very inconsiderable causes. IIen(5^, 
if the politician were acquainted, not only 
with the domestic transactions, but with tln^ 
private characters of statesmen, he would pro- 
bably often find that the most important an^ 
extraordinary events frequently originate in 
secret motives inctbp narrow selfish passions; />f 
-obscure individualsj the parasites or dependents 
of the great, or in trifling incidents unknown 
to the world. 

From these and other considerations, it has 
been argued, that history in general is entitled 
to little credit, or at least tha-t only public oc- 
•eurrences can possibly be certainly known or 
faithfully recorded. %e rest, it is supposed, 
must have been merely the conjecture of the 
historian. But diligence, caution and accurate 
reseaxcb> -/KQ-^frP-J^'. ^i^cqretical speculation or 



lUfiixiom on Historii, &V. 360 

^.».\rty,' spirit, AviU probably, in most instances 
discover the proper causes for the most in- 
teresting events recorded in the Jinnals of man* 
kind. If these causes seem tritiing it may be! 
rationnl to- conclude, tiial the DivinerProvi- 
donce. ordained -the issue by means of inferior 
and unlikely instruments for the sake of Jeadinf 
his reasonable creatures to acknowledge, that 
the termination was appointed aud accom- 
plished by counsels wiser than human. 

To the truth of history in general it may- be 
objected, ; 'that df 'some • particular periods, 
g yen .by iwr iters of credit and reputation, dif- 
ferent aiid contrary accounts have been given. 
For instance, it was long generaily received, 
that Kichard tlie 11 Id. of England, Avas re- 
markably deformed, and that he gained the 
throne; by a series of murders. But Walpole, 
ill his Ilistorical Doubts, has brought docu- 
ments before unknown, to show that the 
usurper's bodily frame was not mishapen, and 
that his nephew Edward the Vth, actually 
walked in procession at his uncle's coronation. 
Though it may not bc^easy to discover what 
^yas the fact, yet it ; is not reasonable . to 
discredit the whole of history, because dark 
clouds may rest upon some particular parts. It 
was manifestly Henry the Vlith's interest to 
black eo. the. tjchaiJacter of il predecessor, who 
z z 2 



366 ReJl(*tions on History, ^c, 

certaipJy reigned too short a time to wash 
away the stain of any ferocious actions, which 
ambition and civil wars ^ might have tempted 
him to commit. 

In like manner, Mary Queen of Scots has 
furnished historians with many subjects of 
dispute. That she was beautiful and unfor- 
tunate cannot be deniied, but whether she was 
privy to the murder of Darnley, her husband, 
or whether she fomented a popish conspiracy 
in England, has not yet perhaps, been clearly 
ascertained. Still the credibility of her remain^ 
iag, history. :cafinot reasonably be impeached, 
whilst it would be flagrantly absurd hence to 
infer, that no degree of credit is due to the 
usually received accounts of mankind. There 
may be many doubts and difficulties in the 
annals aiid records of nations, yet either human 
testimony is not to be believed or the general 
and leading circumstances are of an unques- 
tionable nature. 

When the celebrated Raleigh, during: his im- 
prisonment in the Tower' of London, was 
writing the History of the World, a loud alter- 
cation under his window interrupted his 
studies and disturbed his reflections. Unable 
to hear distinctly the nature or progress of the 
dispute, he endeavoured to satisfy his curiosity, 
by asking different individuals who soon after- 



liejitxion^: on Historij, Sc. 567 

wards entered his room, what was the cause of 
the noise, and what were the particulars of the 
cjuarrel. Hut no two persons agreed in the 
same account. " Cannot 1 then, (thought 
" the sage) learn the truth of an incident in 
" .my own time, from persons present at the 
** transaction, and shall I presume to write the 
" history of mankind in remote ages and coun- 
*' tries ? Perhaps the best authorities 'for the 
'* credibility of ancient history, may frequently 
'* be persons, who have received their accounts 
" from others, as inaccurate or prejudiced as 
" those from whom I have inquired." Raleigh's- 
work was however written, and is yet extant; 
The objection therefore, to the credibility of 
history, which the fray suggested, had but a 
temporary, or at least not an effeqtual influence 
on his mind. Perhaps he had not inquired 
enough; perhaps he had inquired too soon 
before the passions of the different parties were 
cooled. Other spectators or auditors might be 
less interested or more impartial. The general 
outlines of the story might be correctly drawn; 
though in some inferior particulars the naitators 
mi«:lit be found to differ. 

Histories written by contemporaries, arc 
without doubt desirable productions, but due 
allowance must be made for the prejudices of 
the characters and times. Without such his- 



56ft'' Bcflexions on Hisf/ory, 8(c. 

tonGs/:it'mayibe impossible for future writers 
to relate ithe aimais [df . thein progenitors. Jilut 
as in > surveying a landscape, the eye may^be 
too near as well as too distant to discover all 
its beauties ; so perhaps, though the proper ma- 
terial: fbn history cannot ibe tbo soon collected, 
yctr frequently : some little time should elapse 
before they are ranged in .order, Coiitpmpo- 
ratics are apt to dwell upon minutise, which 
render their accounts tedious, which may 
scarcely be interesting at the time, which every 
day : grow less important, and which > ^ve not 
w^orthy io be remembered, unless -they eluci- 
<iste subsequent momentous occurrences. Cer- 
taunly fhe.history of, interesting and, important 
xevoliitibns should not be published till, the 
passions and prejudices excited by the <^ontest 
are worn away, and: reason is enipowered to 
pass anr impartial decision on the • various 
merits of the cause. As historians assume the • 
office of instructing posterity, so they should 
particularly^ be\vare of being influenced by 
party:S,pitit.jiio'-> ed h 

If "in, his history •of,tbe.Peloponnesi^i1i war, 
Thucydides has not excited. for his countrymen 
the Athenians, a greater degree of interest than 
their ill directed ambition may seem to deserve, 
yet it is generally acknowledged that Tacitus 
and Siuetonius, who were nearly contemporaries 



Jtejlmons on Hi storey sc. ^SG^ 

with most of ' the events recorded .in thclrstx?- 
spcctivc works, have, Avith a propensity com- 
mon to many serious minds, delineated inci- 
dents with too sombre a j>encil. Had they 
been at a greater distance from the gloomy 
views, v^^hich they bavc given, they might 
have blended a little more light with the sliade, 
and rendered their historical landscapes, more 
agreeable as well as more faithful and exact. 

But if historians who record the events of 
their o^yn times be influenced. by party spirit, 
to give various and contrary, accounts, their 
very prejudices tend to cure their own evils, 
and guide the candid and impartial to the 
attainment of truth. When a narrator has any 
inferior object in view, the judicious and dis- 
cerning are not long in discovering his aim. It 
was soon perceived, for instance, that Hume 
was too ])artial to the Stuarts ; and that one of 
his objects in writing the previous history of 
Eugland, Avas to show that the encroachments 
of t\je royal power were not without prece- 
dent in the reigns of the Tudors. Though the 
question might still be referred to principles of 
general policy and justice, yet if the mind 
should receive an undue bias from such repre- 
sentations it may easily recover its bent, by ap^ 
plication, to the narraiiviC of- Macaulcy, or if 
that be thought top favorable .to the. repub J icijn 



S70 Reflcvions'dn History, S^c. 

party, every . prejudice may he removed by 
perasing thtji pages Off the patient and candid 
Rapih. It'hds been sarcastically observed by 
Voltaire, that the best history of England was 
written by a foreigner; but it should be recol- 
lected that this foreigner was a student of the 
English law, and previously well acquainted 
with the principles of civil and religious liberty. 
Whether Henry's history of Great Britain may 
rot wrest the laurel from Rapin^ future ages will 
probably determine. Perhaps the principal 
defect in this excellent work may be too rigid 
an adherence to a previously formed plan, which 
separates subjects naturally united, unnecessa- 
rily multiplies references, or occasions frequent 
and tedious repetitions. 

Probably it will be found after diligent and 
careful examination, that history best divides 
itself, or that a correct retrospect of human 
annals will suggest a just and proper distribution 
of them. Mosheim has, perhaps, injudiciously 
divided his ecclesiastical history into centuries, 
and has thus rendered a subject in itself not 
very fascinating, stiU less alluring. Historians 
who mean to recommend the themes which 
they have chosen, will fitid it their interest to 
contract or dilate them as they are less or more 
interesting or important, without any respect 
to the periods of time, which they originally 



Rejlexiojis on History, S(c, 371 

occupied. Ancient events may be considered 
by the understanding, as distant objects are 
beheld by the eye, in a general though con- 
nected manner. Hence, perhaps, Chesterfield 
in his letters to his son, yet probably not with- 
out a view to his future diplomatic or political 
employment, has recommended modern history 
as an object worthy of particular attention. 

Possibly from a like motive, some modern 
writers may have selected remarkable periods 
for the themes of their narration. Though 
they may not have given them the proper 
titles, vet it does not follow that the transac- 
tions of such times are not deserving of more 
regard than tl"K)se of others. 

Certainly the xra, when the younger Ana- 
charsis is supposed to have lived, was a most 
interesting period in the annals of the Greeks. 
As among them philosophy never attained « 
higher elevation, so from that time along with 
the spirit of liberty and public virtue, it began 
to decline. Whilst in this excellent work of 
Barthclemy, probably no more is fictitious than 
the name and character of the supposed writer, 
the whole conveys a more complete- idea of 
Grecian history and philosophy, than is pep* 
haps any where else to be found. ^ 

In like manner Middleton*^s life of Cicefo, 
embracing the most enlightened and interesting 
3 A 



372 Beflexions on History, Ssc. 

period in the Roman history, claims a diligent 
and an attentive perusal from every friend of 
liberty, .oratory and science. Voltaire's Age 
of Louis the Fourteenth, should not be .con- 
demned merely for its title, nor censured till a 
better can be found. As it was certainly a 
period, which displayed ambitious tyranny, 
but was distinguished for polite literature -y so 
the wTiter, notvi^ithstanding his prejudices for 
the supposed grandeur of his country, has not 
failed to delineate the subject in both points of 
view. But without any prejudices of such a 
nature, Robertson has chosen for one of his 
themes the reign of Charles the Fifth, a period 
remarkable for the secession of the Protestants 
from their obedience to the see of Rome, and 
noted as the time when the system called the 
balance of power, was established in Europe. 
The reign of Philip the Second was an a^ra of 
bloody persecution, and has, in very plain and 
unaffected language, received its just condem- 
nation, in the history of Watson. 

In like manner the lives of Poggio Brac- 
ciolini, and Lorenzo de Medici, are at least 
interesting to classical scholars, because they 
describe the period when by their labours and 
researches, the most celebtated works of the- 
ancient Greeks and Romans, were not only re- 
deemed from the obscurity of the dark ages. 



Beflexiona on Histoid, SCc. 373 

but collected and preserved for the instruction 
and improvement of posterity. 

Consistent and regular students of history 
will not, however, content themselves with 
reading the annals of mankind in detached 
{portions. But whilst they pay a proper tribute 
of respect to the works of those writers, who 
have selected striking periods for the labours of 
their pens, they will endeavour to collect a 
just and complete idea of all the events, 
changes and improvements, which have taken 
place in the world, from the earliest ages of 
which there is any account, down to the pre- 
sent day. That war should engross so much 
of the historian's attention, may justly be la- 
mented by the benevolent and humane. Yet 
whilst the faithful description of its incidents 
may render it still more an object of horror, it 
cannot be denied that contrary to expectation, 
and in opposition to the eiibrts and opinions of 
the ambitious and tyramiical, it has, in various 
ways, contributed to the progress of liberty 
and knowledge. In this sense " discord k» 
harmony not understood, and partial evil uni- 
versal good.'* . 

Wlmt is the best method of studying history 

it may not be easy to decide. The ingenious 

D'Alembert has argued, that the most natural 

mode, at least for young persons, was first to iread 

3 A 2 



574 Reflex ioiis on History^ STc. 

accounts of their own times, and then to 
peruse the annals of former periods immediately 
connected with them in a kind of retrograde 
order, till curiosity carries them up to the most 
ancient authentic records of mankind. The 
method may be agreeable and enticing, but so far 
from superseding the usual chronological course 
of historical study, it may still require for the sake 
of producing its complete effect, that events 
should be regularly contemplated from the 
earliest periods, and considered as they have 
happened in the order of time. The mechanic 
who would be master of his art, should not 
only understand the several parts of a machine, 
but should be able to put them together. The 
annals of mankind contain the history of ci- 
vilization, and, in fact, present it to the mind 
as a work of Divine Providence. Whoever 
therefore, would have just notions of its progress 
and improvement, whoever would trace it to 
its proper author, should contemplate its origin 
and observe its melioration through every suc- 
ceeding age. 

In many points of view therefore, history, 
faithful history, is worthy of study and atten- 
tion. It was perhaps the oldest poetry, and 
has certainly not only suggested to poets of 
different ages and nations, particularly to 
Virgil and Thompson, some of their most 



Reftexw)is on Ilistunj, S'c. 375 

pleasing allusions, but in some instances, espe- 
cially in the epic and dramatic provinces, it has 
formed tlie very basis and argument of the most 
popular works. Long before dramas were 
perforiTied, and, as it were, by way of pattern 
to them, history existed iii a dramatic form. 
The recitation of noble actions to free-bora 
minds hath, especially in Grecian times, in- 
spired them with a love, of liberty, and in- 
fluenced them to serve their country and man- 
kind. If the Roman history, together with the 
life of the Macedonian Alexander, contribute 
to encourage the spirit of lawless ambition, 
the decline and fall of that renowned empire 
may also concur with the fate of all warlike 
heroes, who have transgressed the rules of 
justice, to warn the mind against the evil and 
destructive consequences of an insatiable thirst 
for glory and power. Numerous examples of 
sublime, pathetic and impassioned eloquence, 
may be derived from the works of ancient his- 
torians. Their modern brethren have rather 
contributed to the spread of policy, philosophy, 
and commerce. If the narrations of historians 
who were cotemporary with the events be 
more worthy of credit than others, the advo- 
cates of revelation may with confidence appeal 
to the historical scriptures, and point out Moses 
and the Evangelists, especially Luke, a^ in aij 



^76 Reflexiom on History^ &:c, 

extraordinary manner with the simplicity and 
faithfulness of honest and holy men, exempli- 
fying the truth of this assertion. Since the 
histories of memorable periods, probably 
supply lessons of wisdom in the greatest abun- 
dance, whilst they are on that account more 
deserving of study, the works of those illus- 
trious men, who have chosen and graced such 
interesting, important and useful subjects, 
will be read with peculiar pleasure and im- 
provement. If the mind sicken at the idea 
that history principally details the crimes of 
mankind, it should reflect that these may, for 
that very reason, be only the more extraordinary 
and uncommon. At least it should not omit 
for relief to take a view of those improvements 
in the arts and sciences, which manifest the 
ingenuity of man, and demonstrate the provi- 
dence of God. If there be a sincere love of 
goodness in the heart, the attention will finally 
rest upon those instances of public and private 
virtue, which impartial historians cannot fail 
to delineate. Though many of these were not 
contained in the pages of biography, which 
may, perhaps, by way of eminence, be called 
the school of moral wisdom, and which is no 
where better exemplified than in the writings 
of Plutarch, a very judicious as well as. copious 
selection of them may be found in the second 



Reflexions on History, 8sc, 377 

and third of -Priestley's Historical Lectures. — 
If, therefore, a work unite the advantages 
both of public and of private history ; if it 
display not only the crimes but the virtues of 
mankind ; if it delineate the progress of ci- 
vilization, the advancement of the arts and 
sciences; if, by its examples or warnings, it 
tend to inspire the mind with the love of good- 
ness, and with an abhorrence of vice ; if it 
confirm the truth or shew the excellence of 
natural or of revealed religion, it may effect 
some of the most important purposes in human 
life, and render men wise and benevolent, 
holy and blessed for evermore. Since, then, 
history may teach both, wisdom and virtue, and 
since it undoubtedly displays what progress 
men have made in improvement of various 
kinds, it may justly be termed the volume of 
providence, and may join with nature and 
divine revelation ; in proving that all things 
work together for good. 



( 378 ) 
On natural and MORAL 

PHILOSOPHY, 

AND THE 

Proper Manner of Philosophising in both. 

BY 

The Rev. G. WALKER, R R. S. 

Read March sth, 1802. 

IN the works of a powerful, wise and design- 
ing artist, whoever this artist be, we expqct a 
similarity of general plan ; that there be in 
each an end, and a respectable end in view ; 
that the means be adapted to the end ; that 
there be neither superfluity nor defect of means ; 
that the means be sirhple, but extensive in 
their operation ; and that the manner of ex- 
ecuting one work, and producing the end 
contemplated therein, do not deviate from the 
manner in another, more than the nature of 
the subject requires. 

Thus, if the universe, of which ourselves 
are a part, be referred to a powerful, wise and 
designing author s and if it be not, it is, though 



On NaiuraL and Moral Philosophy, 379 

the most astonishing of all productions, the 
only one which wc admit to exist without an 
adequate caiisc, it will be expected tliat a si^ 
railarity of plan, and of means adapted to the 
end, will be exemplified in the provisionary 
furniture of every part of the natural and moral 
creation. — In the material universe, though 
infinite forms exist, and constitute an infinity 
of specie^, yet every species has an appropriate 
character, has a specific end to subserve, and 
by some latent constitution, of which we car> 
give no other account, than that it is tlie will 
and gift of its author, is furnished with powers, 
which enable it uniformly and invariably to 
sustain its part in the creation. — We acknow- 
ledge this appropriate character in every species 
of the* fossil, the mineral, and the vegetable 
kingdoms. .Vnimal life with its faculties, and 
functions presents so diflferent a scene, that we 
know not how to consider the beings of this 
order as mere varieties of material form ; yet in 
the individuals ot any species of the animal 
kingdom, except man, we observe an almost 
perfect uniformity of character to a similar 
cause as in a fossil or vegetable species, viz. 
to a latent constitution, originating with their 
birth, unfolded in their progress, from which 
every impulse and movement issues; and short 
of which or beyond which they cannot go, 
3 b • 



3 so On Natural and Moral PhilosopJnj. 

To be more particular, the different cliissc^ 
of earths, stones and metals, have each their 
peculiar properties and specific differences ^ and 
if it be asked, whence they derive these pro- 
perties, and what has impressed upon them 
these specific differences, no answer can be 
given by the Theist, but that the hand of the 
Universal Creator has for wise purposes so 
formed and furnished them, nor by th^ Atheist, 
but that so they are. They both admit a pri- 
mary and elementary character in each species 
as a datum. If from combinations of the simple 
forms, new kinds be produced, the character of 
these compounds is supposed to be derived from 
the characters of the component parts. The 
classes of the vegetable kingdom appear to be 
much more numerous, and probably from this 
circumstance such a resemblance is observed in 
the approximate kinds, as misleads the vulgar 
eye, and exhibits them as one and the same. 
But to a careful observer they are essentially 
distinguished, and each kind propagates its 
kind, and with the same- properties, though 
from adventitious causes they may differ in the 
degree of these properties. The progeny of 
every kind has unalterably the specific character 
of its parent, nor ever> under the operation of 
jiature or man, appears under the specific cha-. 
racter of another kind, however approximate 



On Xalural and Moral PJtilosophy, 38I* 

tlic kinds may be. Although from the seeds 
of an apple or a gooseberry a thousand sub- 
ordinate species of apples or gooseberries may 
be produced, yet they are each separately 
a})ples or gooseberries. From the seed of the 
apple never springs a gooseberry, a pear, a 
cherry, or any other vegetable whatever, and 
cice vtrsd. We have no reason to suppose, 
that from the period of the creation, any such 
transmutation has taken place, or one new 
simple form been produced, though it is posr 
sible that some may have been lost. Compound 
kinds from kindred and proximate species may, 
perhaps, have issued ; but such as are the es- 
sential properties of the kinds which enter inta 
the union, sucli probably will be found to be 
the mixed property of the compound. I speak 
here with diffidence ; for I do not know that a 
new and mixed kind of vegetables has ever 
been produced from two primary kinds ; or, 
if such a phenomenon have taken place, that 
such a vegetable mule has been able to propa- 
gate its kind, apd introduce a new species into 
the vegetable kingdom. The diiTerent classes 
of the material creation do most probably con- 
tinue unalterably the same as they were at first 
fornied, by the hand of their author, each at 
le^t with the same specific differences and 
properties, Uiough in the degree and proportion 
3 B 2 



582 On Natural and Aloral Philosopliij, 

of these properties diflerence may arise from 
adventitious causes. Situation, climate, cul- 
ture, must elTect a difference of magnitude, 
splendour and taste. 

It is impossible to resist the same conclusion 
with respect to every species of animals, except 
man. Here alone the question lies. Every 
individual of each animal species discovers a 
common character, common properties, per- 
forms common functions, tends to a common 
end. The qualities characteristic of one are 
possessed by all ;* eath has its range of action 
circumscribed within the same limits ; there is 
a common end and purpose to which each is 
jfitted. Each attains the summit of perfection 
in its kind in a very sk<^rt period, and to what- 
ever length their existence be extended, they 
manifest no new powers, discover no new pro- 
pensities, learn no new lesspns proper to another 
kind; though the tutelage of man, and re- 
peated practice under this tutelage, mav render 
them more facile, and enable them to exhibit 
a certain novelty, in some of the movements, 
which constitute their general character. The 
progeny of each is of the character of the 
parent, and though from commixture a spurious 
breed may be produced, yet no properties are 
exhibited but what are found in the parents, 
while the. incapacity of the mule to propagate 



On Natural and Moral Philosophi/. 3»!5 

prevents all cWrangcment in the order and 
classification of the animal tribes. To animal 
life arc attached consciousness, taste, volition, 
and to some of the higher orders a portion of 
the finer qualities of man are given. In conse- 
quence of this destination of certain animal 
species, and this capacity for higher attainments, 
a greater diversity of character is observed in 
the individuals of such speoies, than in any ve- 
getable class. In some degree they are sus- 
ceptible of education ; in some degree acquire 
tastes and habits, and perform manoeuvres, which 
in the ordinary sfate of their nature would not 
be expected from them ; consort with animals 
of a different order; imitate their peculiarities; 
associate even widi man ; look up to him with 
reverence, gratitude and affection; are ob- 
servant of his will, and entertain the strongest 
personal attachment to him. Ikit these ob- 
servations of individnal character, if they may 
be so deemed, are not numerous, are found 
only in a few classes, are carried but to a small 
extent, and still the common character of the 
kind is greatly predominant. 

Here, therefore, in the whole of this earth of 
ours that is subject to our view and exami- 
nation, except man, v^e find a similarity of 
plan, an end and a respectable end to be con- 
templated by the artist; we discover a furniture 



381- On Natural and Moral Philosophi/, 

of means adapted to the end, no superfluity or 
deficienc)^f means ; that the mean^ arp in each 
species as simple as the dignity of the species 
in the scale of creation admits of; tliat the 
means, though simple, are extensive in their 
operation, and, which deserves particular 
attention, that the end is attained in all 
the mhnite orders of being, in a manner 
conformed to one general rule, viz. by 
furnishing the individuals of each species ab 
initio with a constitution, which produces 
either a perfect sameness, or such a conformity, 
as discriminates the species. . Whether this 
conformity be denominated a law of nature or 
a law of God, is of no moment to my presen-t 
aro-ument. It is sufficient to my purpose that 
this law, as the proximate cause, is acknow- 
ledged by every philosopher, ot whatever com- 
plexion his religious creed may be, as tlie only 
obvious account of that uniformity which cha- 
racterises the individuals of qvcry separate 
species. 

In aid of the conclusion which I have in 
view, I might adduce the uniformity of the 
law, which regulates the motions of the bodies 
in our solar system, and by a well-founded ana- 
logical presumption, of the infinite systems 
which through the immeasurable extent of space 
claim each a star as their sun. The law is 



Oil Natural and Moj^al Philosophic, S8;> 

one and the same to all, they each move in 
elliptic orbits, and two properties, viz. that the 
elliptic areas commencing from the pcrHielion 
or aj)hclif)n of each are constantly in proportion 
to the timei elapsed, and that the cubes of the 
distances of the planets from the sun are as tt^e 
squares of their periodical revolutions iii their 
orbits, harmonise the motions of them all, 
and assign to each of them, and to their inha- 
bit^mts their respective order and proportion of 
days and nights and seasons. No account can 
be given of this uniformity and harmony, but 
in one of these two ways, first, that some pow- 
erful agent is continually acting upon each orb, 
so as to give to each that direction and velocitv 
which his will determines. I'his is not sup- 
posed by any one, -not even by those, who ac- 
knowledge this agent as the primary cause. 
The second, therefore, as of Tiecessity presents 
itself, that each planet has impressed upon it a 
common pro})crty or properties, which may be 
considered as their common constitution, from 
which are constantly derived the uniformity and 
harmony of their motions. 

We have then advanced a considerable step 
farther, we.have taken into our view, and sub- 
mitted to our examination, inasmuch as thev 
can be subjected thereto, the innumerable 
worlds that float in the vast expanse. Though 



586 On "Natural and Mcr-al Philosophjj. 

the furniture and inhabitants of these world*^ 
are unknown to us, and ot them we can form 
no judgment, yet inasmuch as regards the orbs 
themselves, as productions of the same creating 
power, whatever this power be, we have 
found reason to infer the same conclusion, <\^ 
in the various species which constitute the 
furniture of our globe. The planets of each 
solar system are subject to one and the same 
law, they subserve to one and the same end; the 
means to this end are simple, but extensive and 
grand in their operation ; they have, in fine, 
-common properties, one and the same nature, 
and if we may use_ the tprni, one and the same 
constitution. 

Here, then, in the vast survey of ihc whole 
universe, so far as it can be submitted to our 
* observation and judgment, but still excepting 
man, we find a similarity of plan, in providing 
every single species of being with inherent 
tendencies or qualities, adapted to the part 
which they are intended to sustain, to the pur- 
pose which they are intended to subserve. Our 
observation of the phenomena and history of 
each disposes us to arrange them under 
genera and species, accordingly as individuals 
discover common properties, and a constant 
tendency to a common end. Whatever pro- 
perties in each are not secondary, and can- 



On Xatural and Moral Philosophy. 387 

not bt' derived from .a higher property, we 
consider as primary, essential ; as constituting 
the generic or specific difference ; and unai)le 
to carry our enquiry any iaithcr, we consider 
these essential properties as the originating 
source of the common character, as entering 
into the very nature and constitution of every 
individual of the genus or species. 

Man alone remains unnoticed in this survey, 
and the question forcibly obtrudes itself, is it 
conceivable that he alone shall be excepted in 
this general provision and plan ? Has he alone 
not an inherent constitution, of mind as well 
as body, adapted to and preparative of his spe- 
cific character ? Are not the elements of this 
character, whatever it shall be, interwoven and 
coexistent with his very being ? Is a general 
plan of creation so extensive, so invariably pur- 
sued in every other being ; than which, simple 
as it is, none more worthy of designing wisdom 
and goodness can be conceived ; iuid troni 
which all that strikes us, as harmonious, beau- 
tiful dnd grand in nature as a whole, appears 
to be derived; is this simplicity of plan aban- 
doned in man alone ; who, however dignified 
in the scale of being he may be esteemed to 
be, is but a production of the same all-creating 
artist, issues from the same designing mind, 
3c 



388 On Natural and Moral Phihsophy. 

and is one distinct species of the great animal 
Genus ? 

The answer to this question is decisive, so 
far as respects the bodily character of man. 
The faculties of sight, of hearing, smelling, 
feeling, and whatever faculty the human body 
may discover, are undoubtedly coeval with the 
birth, or rather v^rith the existence of the in- 
dividual man, though it requires exposure to 
the objects adapted to them, before they can 
be brought into act, and though they may in- 
crease in strength and power as the body in- 
creases, and in facility of exercise by use and 
habit. No human being acquires one new 
sense, one bodily faculty, which is strange and 
foreign to his kind, however in degree or ap- 
plication to different objects he may differ from 
his fellow. In all the furniture of the body 
therefore, there is a sameness of character in 
man, and this furniture is inherent in the very 
constitution of the human frame ; it is, as in 
every species of created beings, that elementaiy 
provision, which assigns to man his bodily 
character, and limits its extent. 

Whatever the thing in him, called mind, 
be, it is sui generis ; but whatever it be, it 
has properties, which constitute its specific dif- 
ference, and these properties, having no assi- 



On Natural' and Morat l^hiiosophy, 389 

rtiilation to the properties of matter, cannot \)t 
derived from any property which is included i^i 
the view th^t we have contemplated in matter, 
lliey arc, therefore,' derived from the same 
source to which we refer every property of 
every order of beings, or they are an existence; 
without a cause. Man therefore is, and must 
be, in his mind, fashioned and fitted to all its 
future character 'by a nature, a constitution, 
which is coeval with his existence. This nature^ 
this innate constitution, as in the planets of the 
s^lar system, as in every distinct order of earths, 
fossils, minerals, vegetables, animals, is the pro- 
visionary furniture, derived from the one cause 
of all, fitting it to be what it is, or shall be, 
.when unfolded and expanded iii act, in its 
progressive conversation with the rich scenery 
exposed to itsview and action. 

Intellect is one grand character of mind, it 
appears in the faculty of comparison ; in dis- 
tinguishing genera and species by a community 
of property, and thus arranging the infinite 
varieties of nature ; in reasoning from effect to 
cause, and from cause to effect ; in the disco- 
very of abstract truths from the relation of 
equality, proportion or similitude; in logical 
deductions; in acquiring the knowledge of 
means by experience, and thus, whatever end 
be in view, selecting those me^ps ivhich are 

. r> c 2 



5f)0 On Naiitrcl a?id Moral Philosophy/, 

most proper to the attainment of the end, and 
furnishing a constant field of wise, salutary or 
beneficent activity to man. This is, perhaps, 
a compleat summary of the whole province of 
reason, in which, the discovery and the appli- 
cation of means to an end constitute its most 
important office, every other attribute of intel- 
lect being only preparatory thereto. Intellect, 
however, suggests no end ; she is but the servant, 
the minister to those other qualities of the mind, 
which interest it in the beautiful, the sublime, 
the useful and the moral. But whatever judg- 
ment be formed of intellect, the capacity, the 
elements, the principle, from which all its 
functions emanate, must be born with the 
man, must be a part of his primary constitu- 
tion. That he has this capacity, this principle, 
is a fact not to be disputed ; that in this provi- 
sionary furniture he is of all the beings within 
his ken either absolutely singular, or compa- 
ratively so, every other display when con- 
trasted with his passing into evanescence, is 
also a fact beyond all contradiction. And if 
iiot boYn with him. If not provided for him by 
that being from whom the provisionary fur- 
niture of every thing else has appeared to issue, 
who will presume to ascertain the period at 
which, the capacity is received by him, and affirm 
that he is sensible of its communication ? But 

4 



On Natural and Moral PInlosophy, 391 

the conclusion would be the same, it is sufR- 
cient that it is a provisionar)' gift, that the ca^ 
pacity of intellect is not his own creation. If 
he had such a powef, the very will to possess it 
would be argument of a pre-existent intel* 
lect. Man, therefore, in one great character of 
mind, is conformed to the plan which in so large 
a sun'ey of nature we have found to be uni- 
formly observed. Designed to be a rational 
being, and act with a deliberate purpose to an 
end, he has a provisionary constitution of mind 
fitting him for this dignified walk. 

But whence is derived to him the worth and 
importance of the various ends and enjoyments, 
to the attainment of which intellect is so valu- 
able a minister ? One of these ends is the 
gratification of appetite, the delight in food. 
This is not simple as in other animals ; appe- 
tite in him comprehends a diversity of tastes, 
multifarious almost as the supply of the vegeta- 
ble and animal kingdoms. This character, 
though not to the same extent in all, and sub- 
ject to the controul of higher considerations, 
to which in their order we shall advert, is ge- 
neral in man. It is difficult to ascertain the 
precise limits which separate the different 
classes of animal being, to say where one spe- 
cific character absolutely begins, and where it 
ends, and therefore in a few animals an ap- 



392 On Natural and Moral Philosophy. 

petite for a variety of food, beyond what they 
discover in their untutored state, may be ex- 
cited by the management of man. But this is 
so rare, so very limited in extent, that he must 
be sceptic indeed, who will not allow to man 
a very striking and characteristic difference in 
this attribute of his nature, designing him even 
in this lowest walk of gratification, and lowest 
end of his being, for a wider range of action, 
and a wider range of enjoyment, as an incite- 
ment to the exertion of his active powers. 

But it is remarkable in man, in all this gra- 
tification of appetite, extensive and varied as it 
is, and great as is the portion of time, attention 
and exertion which is directed thereto, that he 
feels no sense of dignity as attached to the pur- 
suit ; the enjoyment is fugitive ; often leaves a 
palling and disgust behind it ; and is one of 
those pleasures which cannot be reviewed with 
delight, nor be re-enjoyed by reflection, unless 
by a few, w^ho are considered as among the de- 
based of our species. Fugitive however as the 
enjoyment is, it has answered to all the end of 
multiplying the sum of human gratification ; 
and to all, though in various degrees, and 
often without being directly perceived, this 
higher purpose; of inviting to exercise, to 
health ; of provoking intellect, design and 
plan j of associating with all the nobler qua- 



On Natural and Moral Fhilosopfnj, 39'S 

lities of our nature, with the love of order, of 
the elegant, the beautiful ; and what is of still 
superior import, the rational and friendly in- 
tercourse of fellow man. It is the association 
with these nobler propensities which corrects, 
limits, chastises the grossness of appetite ; se- 
parates it from indecency atnd excess, and gives 
to it a dignity, a grace, and even a worth, 
which of itself it would be incapable of. 

If, then, analogy be in any instance a safe 
guide to man, here we without fear may com- 
mit ourselves to its instruction. From the ex- 
tensive view that we have taken of the pro- 
vident wisdom of the Creator, it is indeed an 
irresistible conclusion, that mind is not in one 
instance neglected by him, and therefore, least 
of all, in a moral view, the sublim'est purpose, 
which man as a creature of the all-formino* 
artist is designed to answer. It must be, that 
in this, as in every other part of the character 
for which he is destined, he should have a pro- 
visionary, an elementary constitution, not dc- 
jived from any secondary, but immediately 
from the primary cause of all ; and that his 
future character, all the phenomena of his suc- 
ceeding histor)' should be only the develope- 
ment of this elementary constitution. There are 
many other circumstances, which may come in 
aid of this elementary constitution, and co- 



o94. On Natural and Moral Philosophy. 

operate to the ultimate purpose for which mind 
and moral mind are in any degree at first con- 
ferred; and therefore are also, which, may 
counteract, pervert, and almost destroy this 
purpose. But of these I take no notice ; first, 
because there is nothing singular in this, since 
in. every direction of man and of his mind, there 
are both favourable and unfavourable attendant 
circumstances ; and secondly, because a com- 
plete system of mind and moral is very far from 
being my object. I wish only to establish a 
first leading principle, as the foundation of all 
subsequent enquiry in moral, as a safe guide to 
every one, who would modestly and soberly 
philosophise on man ; and, if this principle be 
founded in the truth of nature, enable him to 
detect the falsity of other theories, which are 
derived from other principles.* 

I receive it therefore as a concessnm that 
mind in man has an elementary moral con- 

* It is a question not impertinent to the object of this essay, 
*' Whence originate these finer and more elegant tastes 
of man, this delight in the orderly, the beautiful, the 
splendid and the sublime ? Whence, indeed, but from the 
designing hand of his Creator, who intending for him the 
moral as the highest perfection of mind, prepares liim tp 
feel and to enjoy the still more beautiful and sublime of 
moral by a delicate gradation of tastes, which to him alone 
of all the animals that inhabit this globe are appropriate, 
which themselves have nothmg of the animal .character. 



On Natkitciband Moral PkMvpMfi SW5 

stitution, prorisionary for its future display, 
and that there is ir perfect similarity of plan in 
the adaptation of every being and order of 
beings in the universe for answerinj^ the pur- 
pose contemplated^ by its author, 1 have, in-- 
decd, so. iaras regards morale produced no 
otlier argument in 'favour of tliis conclusion 
bcsitle analogy ; but then it is analogy so sin*- 
gular, that if the statement on which the ana 
logical inference depends be admitted as a fact, 
and arry one shall deny the conclusion, we may 
venture to assert^ that it is not his mind, but 
his voice that pronounces the rejecting NCX 
I'here are other con*oborating arguments which 
lead to the same conclusion, but on account of 
the extent to which they would carry the sub- 
jectv more proper to be introduced into a regu- 
lar composition, which contemplates the whole, 
than into an essay, which contemplates only a 
part. If I were even disposed to extend my 
view^ the limits of time assigned to the papers 
read before this Society do not admit of it. 

Jt is this principle, common to every order 
of cieatcd beings, which constitutes the con- 
nection that 1 meant to insist upon, because, 

and thuncu dtrrive to ,tho \cry nature which l»c Ivm in 

fonimon with the lowor orders ot v - ?! ^ - ' tjccl 

^tiici 'and digiitty w^hieh ir<* hmrt iiv\ , ' ^ 

3 D 



3^6 On Natural and Moral Pkilosojyln/. 

M true, it connects ab origine the theories of 
body and mind, it'suggestsa common mode of 
investigating the theories of both, and by one 
and the same process establishes a sound and 
true philosophy in both. It will not be -neces- 
sary therefore, to dwell long on the object pre- 
sented m the title of this essay. The connec- 
tion, which in this title I had in view, is a di- 
rect inference from the conclusion that I have 
endeavoured to establish. If the ceconomy of 
the natural and moral world be in the de- 
si^nina: mind of the Creator conducted in one 
common mode, there can be but one mode to 
man of entering into the views of the Creator, 
of investigating the nature, the characteristic 
difference, the end> the fitness of every being 
whom he has subjected to the view of man. 
The rational world is atJength convinced that 
in natural philosophy notruetheoryisto.be 
derived from bold conjecture. To a*rrive at 
truth, man must reason ; upwards, ahd not 
downwards. He miistj begin with what he 
does know, in order to discover what d priori 
it' 13 rK)t possible that he should know ; he must 
.retrace the steps of i the great artificer,:. by fol* 
lowing him in his works. He must store up 
facits ; 'compare,- digest them ;' separate tliose 
which are conseciuent from those wl^ich are an- 
tecedent, and,tj},us iaa regular grad^tiojira^ive 



On Nali&al an f Moral J^hilos'ophy) 397 

at thci. knowledge fof(^ho$c qualities in every 
order of beings,; which liavc no antecedent, 
which tt-*rminate his enquiry, Avhich lie must 
ivAv^t; a$, the tlements, the inherent nature of 
e/y(9ry;joifder. These being admitted as data* 
he^m^ltlveh- safely reason downwards, and 
from thence as a sufficient cause, i satisfactorily 
account for every phenomenon, and seise to 
his; Uije, and apply to the most substantial and 
gratifyiog purpo.scs, the solid knowledge which 
he. ha$ acquired. 

'In this manner ha^f. Ntitural Philosophy been 
succie&jfully prosecuted iipr a long period of 
years, and the secrets of nature been explored 
with honour and with advantage. The fos- 
sil jst, the biotanist,^ the agriculturist, the hor- 
tiqu)tarist> the anatomist, tl>e physician, the 
philosopher, iualargc^ense, who comprehends 
a)l these! departments ; and last, though not 
Jeast, the- chemist, ha v,e learnt to. tread in this 
patji, iiudhnve contributed to rescue philoso- 
phy r&pn>[>the<U5grii0e of arbitrary and mis- 
shapei>f,;theori|es;,.» TJie philosophy of mind 
and moral invites, man to the dijjcovcry of their 
n)ore important and sacred truths only in the 
same road. As the principle which has at 
length prevailed on man to quit tho road ol 
conjecture in pa|u]ra|, philosophy, inquitting 
which, if, at all, natural philosophv <;au alon^: 
3 d2 



398 On Naturul mutJfmahF'hilomph};: 

be perfected ; as this ipitincrple,vi'2?.< law' fekw 
ineiitary toiistrtutiosiii every bein*^^ is Common 
to mind :ia«d lhe:^ubji>ct^ 6f ntOral' lh(*fe'is, 
there can be, ' T>o other' means of arriving atl^ 
truth of nature in this interesting subject,. 'btat 
by the same analytic process as* in all the de- 
partments ^of. natural j>hiiosophy. We mwd 
admit' that th^nea^ an- el^meotar3{ principli^'^ 
moral in the ^mind of man?, aiid t« discover' th(i 
character of this principle, we must atte^mpt 
what I have observed to be so s^utCGessfulIy'^ac^ 
complished in the philosophy of matter.'' -We 
must callect all the; phenomena rf the btnnan 
mindjthe great facts, which coostitiiteth^^history 
of man ; we must compare, digest these facts ; 
arrange them in classes ; separate tho^e whiijh 
are consequent from those which are priitiary, 
"which have no antecedent;; and thus agcenldtQ 
those qualities which constitute the elementary 
nature of mind, w^hich reveal the ^wiW ©F its 
author, and which, if in this analysis any rule 
can be discovered for assigning to each prihiary 
quality its respective place of worth 'and dig- 
nity, will, in every application] 'fix the 
'standard, and pronounce tlie judgment' ''6f 
moral. 

It may be thqught by some, that the whole 
of this essay is unnecessary^ because they have 
.nwer cntcrteijied the Idea of philosophising in 



On Natural and Moral Pliilosophy. S99 

the subject of mind and moral in any other 
mode than what is here recommended. But 
to me nothing appears more unsettled than the 
subject of moral, nothing Jess deserving of the 
name of philosophy than the crude and con- 
tradictory theories of mind and moral, whicli 
divide the ' f)laudits of the modem world. If 
the same mode of reasoning as in the study of 
natund philosophy be the only road to truth 
and usetAil truth in the science of mind and 
moral, theses theories and the favour with which 
they tire received, abundantly prove that this 
road is not yet much walked in. 

1 shall conclude this essay with a few queries, 
whtch may suffice to shew, that some favourite 
theories and doctrines respecting mind and 
moral will not abide the expi^rimental test. 

I might summon many writers to thii 
examerh, stmie who have composed professed 
theories, others who have only in a desultory 
manner discussed the subject of moral, though 
to such discussions their fame has been not a 
little indebted. This, however, woulci carry 
itie too far. ^ Indulgence to a few queries on 
the two favourite theories of the useful and X\\t 
selfish is all, if not more, than it becomes me 
to expect. 

Do those, who make utility the foundation 
and origin of morals, d^rtve their system from 



100 On Xalural. and: Moral F/u'losopht/. 

a sober analysis of man ? Is it a fact in thq 
history, of man, thatitlie useful is always or ge- 
nerallypresent to the mind, before moral judg- 
ment is passed, and that the latter is only as a 
c<>roll^.ry from a geometric truth ? In the ra- 
pidity ot nioral. dej::isions, must a conviction of 
the usefoj nqee^sa^^ily precede vJBUst the mind 
wait,;.. till thi^lencjuiry, always not a little per- 
plexed and involved, be satisfactorily; deter- 
mined.? • When jtlie moral and the useful are 
bqth'. .'ptt^sent, ai^d . iseparately appeal to the 
i^md] as. judge, isj^ntenGi? ney^r, p.ipnoiinced 
in favour of the.p)QTal;|>vh He th.e remonstrances 
of; utility, arje^.^is^nissed with scorn ? In all 
suQb cpllisions, : i^; it i\qt true, that the general 
sen^e^c^nd appr<5>bation of mankipd is in favour 
of th?. iTporal .4<f.^ewination ? Independent of 
^.lljcon^ideralws^fr uUlity, and when pot the 
v,ery,';idea of i^i i? present, does a9,t; the mind 
contemplate the mcral, look upon it, with re- 
verence or delight; does it not feel, acknowledge, 
that in its own nature, it asks not why there is 
something which is wondroqsl^, • attractive, 
something whkh captivates like the beautiful 
and .sublime I :v;^ i^ agji^i^ai -jjiiijovn! orn on. 
^»,/Jhese are querie^s, which direct to. facts, and 
are not to be decided by subtle reasoning, but 
by careful and honest observation, by that 
appeal vvhich every one may make, but where 



(hi Natural and Moral Ph'ilosoplnf. 401 

there must be no previous interest or concern 
about the answer. Whatever tli^ory cannot 
meet these tests, has not been attaiiud by the 
same careful process as in natural philosophy; 
it is not tlie ingenuous truth of human nature. 
Deceit, both of ourselves and our fellow nian, 
frequently insinuates itself into moral as well as 
physical enquiries, by confounding the neces- 
sar\' consequences of phenomena with the 
causes of the phenomena, especially when these 
causes are not obvious to the sense. Now the 
question is not whether the moral, and the 
useful as a consequence, may not generally, or 
even always be found to coincide. But if the 
attributes of man, and what is primary in him, 
be the subject of enquiry, from what principle 
does the mind imperiously decide ? What, as 
fitted to the temper of the mind, constitutes th{» 
attraction to the moral? Is it, becduse we 
connect it with the idea of utility ; or srmply, 
that it appears in the character of a beautiful 
object of sight ? That the useful should be the 
consequent, is nothing wonderful, when the 
whole isteferred to the provicJcncebfthe b^* 
nevolent Creator. But It deserves consideration, 
that in manv instances, the useful in the cvc of 
the Creator neither is, nor can be, in thl^ con- 
templation of man, bemg? indeed beyond the 
reach of' hjs ken ; iand thafp ci-epjwitb tlifi.bcst 



402 On Ndtitral and 'Moral ^Philosopki/. 

intentions, mai\ often entertains very erroneous 
conceptions, of utility. It is, indeed, a most 
fortunate truth, that, our judgment of the moral 
is much more correct than our judgment of the 
useful. . .r 

. It is another question, that if by utility as 
the origin of all moral judgment be understood 
a regard to the greatest public good j what is 
it that carries the individual out of himself, and 
makes the interest of others desirable to him? 
This very desire is the surrender of the whole 
theory,, it is the acknowledgment of the bene- 
volent principles as the origin, of benevolence, 
the most dignified of all the moral virtues. If 
it be answered, that public utility is regarded 
only as it involves the interest of self, and is 
the best security for it, the theory of general 
utility as* the origin of moral judgment resolves 
itself into the selfish scheme, and must stand or 
fall with it. To this therefore I advert in few 
words, and ask the defenders of the Selfish 

Systemj- ' >. : . 

Is it a promineitt fact in human nature, that 
th-e moral judgment i^ measured by the interest 
of the judging mind ? ;l$.iij a fact, ih^t the eye 
of the mind is turned upon self, upon its own 
convenience, utility,.,- and advantage^; before it 
dare to pronounce the sentence of right and 
wrong, of approbation and disapprobation? 



On Natural and Moral PMiioSpphi/. d-Oh 

Arc no moral verdicts recorded, where the 
subject on which the sentence passes, can 
hardly by any ingenuity be brought home to 
scit ; or if it can, where the advantage to self 
is so remote and involved in so nwny chances, 
that it can hardly be deemed to weigh a feather 
in the scale ? Or, if even this evanescent ad- 
vantage be allowed to intiuence, are not these 
moral judgments pronounced, where the very 
idea of a selfish interest is not present to the 
thought, and there being a non-entity to the 
mind, cannot possibly contribute any thing 
whatever to its judgment ? Is not the sacrifice 
of self often, and in the . most important 
instances, the immediate consequence of the 
moral sentence, but yet in despite of the strong 
remonstrances of self, something in the consti- 
tution of the mind demands the sentence, and 
it startles with a kind of horror at the thought 
of a contrary decision ? I would ask also, 
whether the sacrifice of self be not essential to 
the acknowledgment of a praise-worthy deed, 
whether the rate at which the deed is estimated 
be not in proportion to the magnitude of the 
sacrifice ; and whether the praise be not uni- 
versally withdrawn, if an act of the highest 
moral form be discovered to have tprung from 
a selfish motive ? Is not the hero in morals 
always represented, and always the more ad- 

3 E 



404 On Natural and Moral Philosophy. 

mired, -iiv the conflict with difficulties and 
dangers, in the exposure of self to every thing 
which is alarming and awful to self, in the 
sacrifice even of > life, and all through the im- 
perious influence of an image of the mind, 
which is for ever alluring, beautiful, sublime ? 

I give no answer to these queries, I submit 
them, gentlemen, to your consideration, as 
suggesting a more than probable error, which 
enters into the fabrication of such theories, and 
the necessity of recalling enquiry to the only 
way, whereby, if possible, error may be 
avoided in explaining and ascertaining the true 
theory of moral mind. 



( 405 ) 

A REPLY 

MR. DALTON'S OBJECTIOXS 

TO A LAVE 

Cljeorp of ilfKjceli <Sasies^ 

IK A t.r.TTER PROM THE AUTHOR TO DR. HOLME. 
BY 

MR. JOHN GOUGHe 

Read Jan. a?, iSo^, 

Sir, 

A LETTER from my' friend Mr. Daltoa 
informs me, that my theory of Mixed Gases 
has been lately read before your Society, 
where the leading opinions of the system were 
controverted by my friend, who may be justly 
called the present champion of the contrary 
doctrine. Opposition on his part was reason- 
able, and might be expected ; because the 
human mind is naturally partial to its own con- 
ceptiong, and frequently condescends to prac- 
tise a little self-delusion, when obliged by the 
force of facts and arguments to abandon a fa- 
A'ourite notion. No man is exempt from tlu^ 
impositions of self-love ; and the universality of 
the passion forbids us to construe a particular 
3 E 2 



406 On the Thdory^of Mixed Ga.^es. 

error of the kind into a personal failing. 

Reasons were offer(id Siilily fofmer essay on the 
present subject, to shew the impossibility of 
two gases intermixing, so as to comply, with 
the demands of Mr. Dalton's hypothesis ; and 
his method of avoiding the consequences of the 
demonstration appears to be a device, sug- 
gested by the crafty manager of the heart and 
its affections ; for I entertain too high a sense 
of his mathematical knowledge, to assign any 
other cause for so manifest a departure from the 
principles of the mechanical philosophy. The 
following passage, relating to the matter in 
debate, is copied from his letter. " In the 
** place, where a quantity of the gas A is sup- 
" posed to be thrown into the compound C, 
" you infer, that upon my hypothesis, the 
••' lighter must ascend and remain at the top ; 
" I infer, that they will instantly be in a state 
" of commotion, until they become uniformly 
" diffused through each other ; and that the 
'' consideration of the centre of gravity of the 
" fluids never comes into the question; be- 
" cause the force of gravity upon any one par- 
*' tide is infinitely surpassed by its repulsive 
" force.'' 

The preceding paragraph exhibits a glaring 
contradiction of inferences ; for the conclu- 
sions arc as contrary as they can be^ and my 



Oji the Thconj of Mixed Gas^s. ¥>1 

opponent considers as useless tlie mechanical 
maxim upon whiclr mine is founded. Thi^ 
perplexity must be removed if possible ; auci 
the following observation perhaps will place it 
in a clearer light, than that in which my friend 
has left it. The grounds of my inferences have 
been already stated at large^ and should any 
of the arguments prove false, they are exposed 
to criticism. On the contrary, i\ir. Dalton's 
reasons liave not been published ; consequently 
any mistake they may happen to contain, will 
be guarded from detection by our ignorance of 
his principles, unless his conclusions can be re*, 
futed, by comparing them with facts and the 
axioms of Natural Philosophy. — This compa- 
rison has been made on my part in varioiK 
instances, to shew the incompatibility of Mr. 
Dalton*s system with sound principles, and the 
operations of nature. But this gentleman .en- 
deavours to invalidate certain inferences of 
mine, which press too heavily upon his hy- 
pothesis, in a manner that may be called rash ; 
because it contradicts an essential proposition 
in Mechanics. He refuses to introduce into 
the dispute, the centres of gravity of the fluids 
which are to be mixed, on a presumption that 
the consideration is useless : and this bold iir- 
novation in the mechanical philosophy is sanc- 
tioned by nothing but a solitary observation, 

3 



4*C^ 0)^ ihi Thbhnj of Mixed Gases. 

which implies, ^that the force of gravity upon a 
particle of an elastic fluid is infinitely surpassed 
by the repulsive force of that particle. The 
truth of this remark, considered as a maxim 
in pneumatics, is fully admitted on my part ; 
but as no logical deductions are derived from 
it by my friend, J am obliged in the present 
instance to pursue thesame conduct which I have 
observed on a former occasion in this dispute, 
and to attack the application of his principles ; 
because it is in vain to look for a scrutiny of 
arguments, where no arguments exist. The 
business then of the next paragraph is to shew, 
that Mr. Dalton*s maxim in pneumatics does 
not forbid a philosopher, who is going to assign 
the phenomena of a gaseous mixture, to take 
into consideration the centres of gravity of the 
fluids, which are to be mixed. 

Mathematicians have proved the centre of 
gravity to constitute an important point in evejry 
body, being the place of its motion as well as 
inertia: and had not my friend's zeal for. his 
hypothesis got the better of his geometry, he 
inust have recollected, that the theorem, which 
determines the existence and true situation of 
this centre, is derived from the relative po- 
sitions and respective quantities of matter con- 
tained in the particles, composing a body or 
, system of bodies ; which quantities of matter 



On the Thcunj of Mixed Gases. 409 

arc in the same r^tio with the weights of these 
particles. The theorem then arises from the 
consideration of weight, unconnected with 
that relation, which the power of gravity, act* 
ing upon the constituent particles, has to any 
internal force, which actuates the elementary 
parts of a body. On the other hand, the 
centre of gravity being the place of motion and 
inertia, it is the true centre of their effects, 
namely, action and reaction ; finally, it is the 
true seat of the mechanical energies of all 
bodies, whether they be fixed, liquid or aeri- 
form. These arc the reasons which induced me 
a while ago to pronounce Mr. Dalton's manner 
of proceeding rash ; because he will now per- 
ceive, that his pncumatical maxim has no 
power to injure those inferences, which it was 
intended to destroy. My demonstration rests 
on this principle : the aggregates of two sets of 
heterogeneous particles, which are mutually 
inelastic, form two elastic fluids ; the mecha- 
nical energies of which reside in their respective 
centres of gravity, ^fhe arguments constituting 
the demonstration are given in my former 
paper ; and I am ready to refer this part of the 
controversy to the arbitration of the matliema- 
tical world, should the Society honour that 
paper with a place in their nlemoirs. 

The preceding remarks on Mr. Dalton's 



410 On the Tlieori/ of Mixed Gases. 

letter appear to contain all that is necessary to 
virtdicate the mathematical part of my theory ; 
consequently it is time to dismiss the subjectj 
and to take a review of such of his objections 
Hs are intei>d^d to weaken the force of the 
coriclusiom, whick I have deduced from re- 
pirted fact^ and ^my own experience. To 
begin then with hi's objections to the argu* 
ments, which • ^fr. Schmidt's experiments 
supply me with, it will be adviseable to give 
th-em in the woiids of Mr. Dalton's letter. — 
** Another argiimeht against me is derived 
*^ from Schm id t*s experiments on the expansion 
*' of dry and moist air: from which you justly 
"'infer, (with the exception of a small error in 
" taking Schmidt's number for moist air for 60* 
*' instead of 59°) that if my theory be right he 
"-must have made his experiments on air of 
*' 15 or 16 inches pressure, and some of them 
** on air from 8 to 5 inches pressure. Now I 
" have no hesitation in resting the merits of the 
*> theory upon this inference ; lif a theory wiii 
** in all cases tell how a man has made his ex- 
^*-periments, I take it to be a tolerably goadT 
wfbnc. The volume of Gren's Journal, con- 
'** taining Schmidt's apparatus, is not in Maib- 
** Chester ; but I hope soon to learn th-e fact. 
" In the meantime I have the authority of 
^' Col. Roi, de Sau68Upe> and yout own to<:or- 



On Ihff Theory of Mixed Gases. 4U 

•* roborate mine, that his numbers are much 
** too large for air ot SO inches pressure. If 
" you will examine the ditlerences of his 
" numbers above and below 90% you will 
** find something wonderful in the quick tran- 
" sition from 12,12, &c. to 115, 1 16, See; this 
*' being the temperature at which, I calculate 
** he has changed his air from 15 to 7 or 8 
" inches pressure." 

The objections contained in the foregoiijig 
quotation, afej of a critical nature ; and a, 
proper reply to them requires a mode of ex» 
pression, to which I recur with reluctance : but 
in controversy, the plain language of inquiry 
will always supersede the punctilious style of 
good breeding. I allow then a theory to be a 
good one, which will , tell in all cases how a 
man makes his experiments ; at the same time 
it is equally certain, that if a theory invaria- 
bly mislead the judgment in this particular, its 
information is no proof of its correctness, la 
order to rescue his hypothesis from the latter 
imputation, my friend informs us he has found 
by calculation, that Mr. Schmidt, in his ex- 
periments upon air saturated with moisture, 
changed the pressure of his apparatus, at 90 
degrees of temperature, from 15 to 7 or 8 
inches of Mercury. Now is not this begging 
the question ? The procedure undoubtedly 
3f 



4l2 On the Theory of Mixed Gasr.T. 

favours the theorem, which is imphcated in the 
same charge with the hypothesis, by consti- 
tuting it the sole judge of the evidence brought 
against them. The surmise also accuses a 
stranger, apparently in an unguarded manner, ¦ 
of being unacquainted w^ith the simplest doc- 
trine of Hydrostatics and Pneumatics ;' though 
this stranger has had the honour of being in- 
troduced to the philosophers of England, by 
Mr. Kirwan ; who moreover pays him the 
CompKmeht of giving a decided preference to 
his e:^tperiments upon the elastic force of va- 
pour. 

V A table wnll be inserted in the postscript, to 
^I)rove, that Mr. Schmidt has changed the 
presstire" of hrs apparatus frequently, if he 
changed it at all. THe 'truth is, there is every 
reason to suppose, he used the mean weight of 
the atmosphere ; but as Mr. Dalton has called 
the circumstance in question, this part of the 
dispute may be properly left to the parties con- 
cerned in it ; and the event cannot prove of 
any moment to me, because the following 
extract from my friend's letter will shew the 
innrpression that has been made on his senti- 
ments, by the experiment with the .moist 
bottle ; at' the same time, he does not appear 
to be fully Sensible of the change, which they 
have liridcrgo'ne. — *^ With regard to yoUr' own 



0}i I he Theory of Mixed Gases. 413 

** experiment, as the result of it agrees witk 
** all the above authorities,* Schmidt's only 
" excepted, 1 cannot question it. The vapour 
^* in your experiment was of the force .of 3.L 
" inches ; the force of vapour of 12G° in my 
*' table is 3.89 inches; but the reason why 
** your's falls short of mine is, two minutes are 
** insufficient to diffuse the full quantity of 
*' vapour through a bottle of such magnitude ; 
" the temperature within would not be quite 
" 126** 5 and the uncovering it with the hand 
** suffers a small portion of the internal vapour 
*^ to escape, which cannot be restored in an 
'* instant. But how is this result to be recon- 
*' cikd with Schmidt's, which makes the force 
**, of vapour of only .106** nearly 10 inches ? 
" If you have any doubt remaining of the in- 
" decisive nature of Schmidt's experiments on 
*' moist air, you have nothing to do but to 
** immerse the same phial perpendicularly, 
*"^ with its mouth open downwards in water of 
" 106% and keep it in that position till no 
" more bubbles escape, which 1 presume will 
" be in 4 or 5 minutes. — Then treating it as 
" before, and allowing for the additional 
*' pressure of the water, the full quantity of 
" vapour may be obtained. If you find it to 

"' Tol. Roi, and M. <le Saussure. 
'3 F 2 



414 On the Theory of Mixed Gases. 

*' be one-fourth part d Schmidt's number, I 
" shall give up the theory as indefensible ; till 
** then I may be allowed to wave all arguments 

" drawn from his experience. Your in- 

" ference from your experiment I disallow... 
** I am sorry, that you and some others have 
" misunderstood my language ; though it ap- 
" pears to me to be your fault rather than ^ 
*^ mine. The expression alluded to is this : 

* The particles of A meeting with no repul- 

* sion from those of B, further than that re- 

* pulsion which as obstacles in the way they 

* may exert, would instantly recede from 

* each other as far as possible in their circum- 

* stances, and consequently arrange th^m- 

* selves just as in a void space.** You seem 

* to understand it thus, * The particles of A, 

* meeting with no repulsion from those of B, 

* would instantly recede from each other as 
' far as possible in their circumstances, and 

* instantlij arrange themselves just as in a void 

* space.* Whereas my meaning was, ' The 

* particles of A, meeting with no repulsion 

* from those of B further than that repulsion 
' which as obstacles in the way they may 

* exert, the amount of which can only be as- 
' certained by experiment, would instantly 

* recede from each other as far as possible in 

* Manchester Memoirs, Volume 5, p. bb\. 



Oh the Theory of Mixed Gases. 4 1 5 

' their circumstances, and in the sequel ar- 
* range themselves just as in a void space.* 
** The truth of the inference thus understood is 
" so obvious from the fundamental principles 
** of the theory, that I do not know what can 
" be said to illustrate it to any one, who un- 
" derstands the object of my 4th proposition. 

** To return now to your experiment. Vapour 
" certainly does enlarge the pores of air, and 
*' that because . it cannot instantli) escape 
" through them, but must push against the 
** particles of air themselves ; but why the ne- 
" cessity of having the force of 30 inches to 
" effect this enlargement of the pores ? If 
" two particles of a gas have a given distance 
** of 99, it does not require a force equal to 
** their mutual repulsion, to remove them to 
** the distance 100, but only t-4^^ of that force ; 
" why then may not the moderate force of 
** vapour enlarge the pores of air in experi- 
•* ments made at low temperatures ; though it 
** is unable to drive the air wholly our ?" 

The first sentence of the precedmg quotation 
confirms the accuracy of the experiment with 
the moist bottle, as far as is necessary : for the 
design of it was to demonstrate, that the 
presence of water increases the expansion of 
air of a given temperature ; and the circum- 
stance has been admitted by the advocate for 



416 On the TJieory qf Mixed Gases., 

the separate existence of vapour, in a manner 
which bespeaks a laudable disregard of con- 
sequences. My end then has been answered, 
by means which were not intended at the time 
to discover the full .extent of the expansive 
power of the moist air in the bottle; and it 
would be impolitic on my part, to engage at 
present in the practical part of a dispute which 
lies wholly betwixt Air. Dalton and Mr. 
Schmidt. The former gentleman has recourse 
to the experiment in question, with a view to 
depreciate the credit of the latter, by its as- 
sistance ; but in all probability the bad effects 
of the undertaking will ultimately fall upon his 
own theory. Schmidt does not state the elastic 
force of vapour of 106" at 10 inches or nearly 
so ; on the contrary, the force of vapour of 
106,25*" amounts according to his table to no 
more than 2,23 inches, French measure.* 
This exaggerated statement appears then to 
rcsult from his method of calculating, and 
cannot be said to place his principles in a very 
favourable light. In reality, this is as a second 
endeavour to withdraw the suspected theorem 
from the station of defendant, in order to pro- 
mote it to a tribunal, where it is to judge its 
own case. — My friend, perhaps, will recollect, 

* The French linear inch is to the EngUah, as 1,' to 



Oil the Theory of Mixed Gases. 4 1 7 

that he has other arg^unients to answer, besidcB 
those that '^ire fiirhished by Schmidt ; and that 
whilst these dbjcctions to his doctrine remain in 
force, they oblige him to consider moist air in 
the light of a chymical compound. Now any 
attempt to calculate the forte of vapour in a 
mixture df thi^ description is visionary, and 
must prove a sourceof error, if put in practice; 
because it is inipossible to discover the qualities 
of a chymical compound from the known, pro^ 
perties of its ingredients. Mr. Dalton's con- 
fidence in his theorem is evidently connected 
with a notion, that vapour, mixing v^^ith per- 
fectly dry air increases the spring of it, to the 
exact amount of its own force.* But there 
are strong reasons to suspect his manometers 
of being very treacherous guides :^ a tube of^^ 
of an inch internal diiameter i^ too narrow : the 
mercury cannot pTay freely in it ; and the ex- 
perimenter is at liberty to estimate at pleasure 
the errors, arising from its impeded motion. 
The supposed power of vapour to increase in 
appearance the elastic force of air confined in 
a manometer, is mentioned and explained in 
such expressive words by Mr. Dalton, that 
nobody can mistake his meaning. Indeed his 
style is in general too correct and perspicuous 

* Manchester Memoirs, Vol. 5, p. 537, • 



418 On the Theory of Mixed Gases, 

to create any doubt or misconception ; in the 
present instance, however, he accuses several 
of his readers of misunderstanding his fourth 
proposition ; and the nature of the mistake is 
clearly stated in the foregoing quotation. My 
essay will shew, that the charge does not reach 
me y because the impossibility of two gases 
mixing instantaneously is demonstrated, imme- 
diately preceding the refutation of that pro- 
position. 

Thus much may be said in relation to the 
notion of gaseous flu ids penetrating each other : — 
As for the application of ,the general idea to the 
particular case of vapour, Mr. Dalton^s readers 
have an indisputable right to vindicate their 
understandings, by quoting such passages of 
his essays as they may think proper : the passage 
alluded to in particular by me, is this. *' The 
•' obstruction, however, cannot arise from 
*^! the weight of the atmosphere, as has till now 
** been supposed ; for then it would effectually 
•* prevent any vapour from arising under 212°; 
•' but it is caused by the vis iriertiw of the par- 
** tides of air ; and is similar to that which a 
•* stream of water meets with in descending 
" amongst pebbles."* 

The preceding illustration of the passage of 

« Manchester Memoirs, Vol. 5. p. 580. 



Oji the Theorx) of Mixed Gases. 419 

vapour through a bed of air always appeared 
to me repugnant to the mechanical philosophy; 
and my objections to the hypothesis shall be 
stated in their proper place. In the mean 
time, the context of the quotation, more espe- 
cially the happy and familiar elucidation of 
water descending through pebbles, shews Mr. 
Dalton to have once imagined, that the par- 
ticles of air oppose an insuperable resistance to 
the impulse of vapour of low temperatures. 
Hut the conviction of experiment has van- 
quished this favourite opinion ; and the author 
of it seems desirous of concealing an important 
change of sentiment, by charging his readers 
with a want of penetration. My friend ac- 
knowledges, that vapour of less than 212' does 
enlarge the pores of air ; this is his present 
notion ; and by way of defence he asks, why 
a force, inferior to the weight of the atmo- 
sphere, cannot increase the distance of two 
gaseous particles in a small degree ? My 
reasons for rejecting the substance of this ques^ 
tion will appear in the next pai*agraph j and 
{perhaps they may be considered to furnisii a 
refutation of M. De Luc's hypothesis, with all 
the corrections that can be given to it. 

A maxim in Pneumatics has been already 
qiioted from Mr. Dalton *s letter-; which would 
irtiall' probability have been delivered nearly 
3g 



•120 On ihc Theory of Mi xdii Gases, 

in the following words, hiid not the hurry of 
writing induced him to express his thoughts in 
a manner, which appears to be somewhat too 
general. " The force of gravity upon a par- 
" tide of the atmosphere is infinitely surpassed 
*' by the repulsive force, which the same par- 
" tide exerts on the nearest corpuscles of its 
*' own kind.'* The preceding maxim cannot 
be called a self-evident truth ; because it is 
derived in the following way, partly from ex- 
periment, and partly from argument. . The 
air has been found by experimental philoso- 
phers to have weight and elasticity ; which 
properties are supposed to reside in* the con- 
stituent particles of the mass. Hence it happens, 
that each particle endeavours to descend per- 
pendicularly ; but is prevented from falling 
below a certain point, by the repulsive force of 
the next inferior particle lying in the same ver- 
tical line : thus the latter particle sustains the 
former with all the pressure, which urges it 
downwards at the time ; that is, it supports 
the whole weight of the incumbent column, 
consisting of gaseous particles of its own kind. 
Now as the number of incumbent particles is 
indefinitely great in thc>'jiether parts of the 
atmosphere, the weight of any one corpuscle 
cannot have an assignable ratio to the united 
pressure of the whole ; ^hich is equal to .the 



Ou (he Theory of Mixed Gase€. 4i21 

repulsive force of the p;irticle that .sustains flip 
superior column. 

I'hc truth of the niaxan I'^iiiy, thus esta- 
blished, upon the axioms of Mechanics, it 
must be used in the next, place tp dis^pver the 
least adventitious fprcc, which i j^^n enlarge 
the porx^s of a gas,, by increasing the distance 
of the contiguous particles. 

It is evident, that during the mutual scj)a- 
ration of the corpuscles, each superior particfle 
must jr^cedc more qr less from the particle, 
whicb-.Jiess .immediately under, it; that is, it 
must ascend in opposition to its natural pro- 
pensity to descend. Now the power, which 
urges a corpuscle upwards, exceeds its original 
bias downwards j;- because when a body is 
actuated by t wo ,^<;x)ntrary forces^,; it always 
moves in the direction, of the stronger., , Con- 
sequently the least adventitious force, that can 
enlarge the pores of a gas, must somewhat 
^Ujpass the pressure, which urges the particles 
of rttjt, downwards: but-lhis pressure on any 
particular particle consists o^ t^e, collective 
yve:ights of all the incumbent particli?s. Hence 
it appears, that vapour, which enters a gas, 
has something to contend with besides the vis 
inertix of a number of minute. atoms : it must 
overcome the forC|e, of gravity, upon the whole 
iiuid j that is, it .nfj^i^ acquirp- ii; bj^^jling^J^oari 
3 o2 



422 On the Theory of Mixed Gases, ' 

before it can effect an entrance, according to 
Mr. Dalton's own experiments. 

The preceding arguments are derived from 
self-evident principles -, and they discover the 
reason, why Mr. Pictet and others have proved 
unable to do away the objections to which 
the weight of the air exposed their favourite 
notion. In reality the objections appear to be 
unanswerable ; because the notion has been 
demonstrated to be repugnant to the mecha- 
nical philosophy. Mr. Dalton lately invented 
an ingenious correction of M. de Luc*s hy- 
pothesis, according to which, vapour, in pas- 
sing through a stratum of air, meets with a re- 
sistance from the inertia of the gaseous par- 
ticles, similar to the opposition a current ex- 
periences in making its way through a bed of 
pebbles. The inference that follows this 
familiar illustration is obvious ; namely, that 
the particles of air remain immoveable like the 
pebbles, the one doing nothing, but obstruct 
the progress of the steam., just as the other 
diminishes the velocity of the water. But 
though the merit of my friend's, corrected hy- 
pothesis depends upon the establishment of this 
new idea, he seems desirous to abandon it at 
present, and maintains that vapour of low tem- 
peratures does enlarge the pores of air ; he must 
therefore be contented to rank with AL Pictet, 



0)1 the Thcorij of Mixed Gases, 423 

and the other unsuccessful advocates for an 
aqueous atniospliere, until he has refuted the 
]:)rcccding arguments, which have been de- 
duced from his own maxim in pneumatics. 
.^.^^^ 

A ' table shewing the various degrees of 
pressure, under which Mr. Schn^idt made his 
experiments on air saturated with moisture 

according to Mr. Dalton*s theorem. ^N. B. 

The temperature in this table is expressed by 
the scale of Reaumur, and the pressure by the 
height of a column of mercury in French 
inches, the force of vapour being taken riot 
from Mr. Dalton's, but Schmidt's table pub- 
lished in Nicholson's Journal for July, 1803. 



Temp. 


Press, in iach. 


l" 


1.65* 


5« 


18.10 


8*^ 


16.33 


10« 


14.86 


12» 


16.44 


150 


16.48 


QO^ 


16.30 


25^ 


15?^ 


28 


8.7 


30*> 


6.5 


32"^ 


2.9 


33^ 


5.2 



JOIIX GOUCill, 

MiddUilittw, Dec. 2d, 1803. 



4'24 On the Tlieory of Mixed Gases. 

. P...S. Since writing the preGcdii^g letter I 
have made an experiment, which leads me to 
agree with Mr. Dalton, in suspecting Schmidt's. 
accuracy. I desire, however, to keep my judg- 
ment in suspense, unti]^ his experiments have 
been repeated by some philosopher,, whose 
impartiality cannot be called in question. In 
the mean time, the arguments which have 
been drawn from his table, must lie under the 
same suspicion as the table itself ; but this cir- 
cumstance is of no moment; because It only 
invalidates a collateral proof, without affecting 
the principal facts and conclusions. 

J. G. 



REMARKS 

-]//•. Go UGH 's ^tt?a -^^-i'^J^ on the poqli^ine of 
Mixed Gases ; and on^Prqfesso7'<^cHMiDT's 
Krperimenfs on the Expansion of Drij and 
Moist Air by heat. 

BY JOHN DALTOX. 

Kead October 4< 1805. 

JL wo Kssays on the Theory of Mixed Gases 
and on the state of water in the Atmosphere, 
have been read to this Society, the former in 
1803, and the latter in 1804, having an espe- 
cial relation to ray Essays on the same subjects 
which were published in the Memoirs of this 
Society, \'ol. 5. part 2. — Having formerly 
had some conversation with the author of those 
essays on the subject, in which I found his 
sentiments did not accord with mine, 1 desired 
him to commit them to paj>er, apprehending 
that if any substantial argument against my 
j)eculiar doctrine existed, he would lay hold 
of it, and exhibit it in a clear point of view.—- 
Some time after this, the former of the two 
essays /^page 296) was presented to the Society 



426 ^ BemajiiS on Mixed Gases^ 

and read. In returning the thanks of the So- 
ciety to the author, I gave him, agreeably to 
former intimation, my opinion on his argu- 
ments, couched in terms of respect, as may 
be seen in his second essay, into which the ¦ 
greater part of my letter was transcribed. It 
was intended by me for a letter of friendship, 
and not a formal discussion for public inspec- 
tion.— In a few months after came his second 
essay (page 405) ; this, as may well be ima- 
gined, by any one who peruses it, w^as not 
entitled to the same notice from me as the 
former ; because in discussions relative to ex- 
perimental philosophy, we expect facts op- 
posed to facts, and arguments to arguments ; 
whereas in the present instance Mr. Gough , 
has done little more than insinuate that my 
instruments are inaccurate, and the results of 
my experiments unfaithfully represented, with- 
out in any one instance bringing either of these 
charges home to me. 

It is not my design to spend much time in - 
animadversion on these two papers : such parts 
of my letter as are quoted in the second of 
them contains all the observations of importance 
on the first : but as some of those observations 
Involve facts and circumstances not then ascer- 
tained, it vv^ill be necessary to relate what has 
since transpired. 



0nd on ike Expansion of Moist Air. 427 

It may be recollected that Mr. Gough refers 
us more than once for authority to the expe- 
riments of Professor Schmidt of Giessen, which 
have been largely quoted by Kirwan, in his 
Essay on the Variations of the Atmosphere, in 
the 8th vol. of the Irish Transactions. (See 
also Nicholson's Journal, vol. 5, page 207). 
This Gentleman made a scries of experiments 
on the force of pure steam, and on tJic ex- 
pansion of dry and moist air, which were pub- 
lished in Gren's Physical Journal, 1798: Mr. 
Kirwan's Essay was read in 1801, and in the 
succeeding year ray essays on the same subjects 
as Schniidt*s were published, without any ac- 
quaintance with his results. — Mr. Kirwan, 
finding Schmidt to be a careful experimenter 
and well acquainted with the labours of his 
|)rcdecessors, naturally gave him the preference 
to them ; but not informing us of the structure 
of his apparatus, we could gain no knowledge 
on that head but from the original, a w^ork 
scarce in this country. As the results of his 
experiments on moist air, as cxhibiUd hij 
Kirzvan^ differed remarkably from mine, I 
was anxious to know the nature of his ap- 
paratus : I wrote to him by a friend requesting 
the favour of a plate or other descripticm of it ; 
in the mean time, guided by the theory oi 
moist air which I had confidence \v9;> fully 



42 S Re murks on Mixed Gases, 

established/) III Ventured to assent to Mr! 
Gough's calculation at page 312, as mentioned 
in my letter, page 410; namely, that Schmidt 
must have made his experiments with the 
pressure of Is' or 16 inches of mercury. 

That Gentleman, in due course, answered 
rrty note by. a polite letter, accompanying a 
copy of his essays in the German language.*" 
On looking it over I was surprised to find not 
a single trace of the table given by Kirwan as 
his, exhibiting the expansion of moist air ; 
what increased my surprise was to find another 
table on the expansion of moist air at page 
353, totally different from the one alluded to, 
and calculated for every 10° of the hygrometer 
and for every 5"" of the thermometer (Reau- 
mur's) from Schmidt's own experiments ; that 
column of it which is for saturated air, or when 
the hygrometer is at 100% I shall extract, as 
being the only one to my purpose, and the one 
which Kirwan evidently intended to give; along 
with which I shall place a corresponding table of 
expansion calculated from my own experience, 
or rather from the theory to which it led me. 
I adopt Schmidt's numbers for the expansion of 

¦^ Versucha uber die cxpansiykraft dichte, und latcntt 
hitzc de8,rem(i^n wfisserdampfes bey verschicdenen tempe- 
raturen, und uorr die ' ausdehnung dor trockneii uud 
icuchton Luft dnrch die T\"ormo. 



and on Lite Expansion of Moist Air. 429 

drj^ air, as not ditfcring materially, as far as 
respects the present subject, from my own ; 
I take the force of vapour from my table 
(Memoirs vol. 5, part 2. page 559) from which 
that of Sclmiidt no where differs widely. I 
calculate from 1 part of air saturated with 
moisture at the temperature of S2** in order to 
compare with Schmidt, and for every 5° of 
Reaumur's scale. The boiling point is sup- 
posed in mine to be taken at 30 inches of the 
barometer, though his istakenat 28 French inch, 
which is somewhat lower. The theorem from 
which I calculate is given at page 572 of the 

Memoirs above quoted; namely, -^ — -JH^ ^ 

space occupied by air in contact with heated 
water, for any temperature; where f= force 
of vapour of the given temperature in inches 
of mercury : the dry air in I measure saturated 
at 32"* is equal ,9933. — I have rejected Deci- 
mals in both tables, beyond the fourth place. 



3h 



430 Remarks 071 Mixed Gases^ 

Table of the Expansion 6/ a given quantity of 
dry air heated in contact with water. 



TEMPERATURE. 


Schmidt's. 


J>ALTON'ii. 


Kirwan'.* 


Fahrrnlicit. 


Reaumur. 


1 Measure of air sa- 
turated with mois- 
ture -= ,Q933 dry. 


I Measure of air sa- 
turated with moist. 
•^ j9933 dry. 


from Schmidt 
by Oiistuke* 


32° 


O*' 


1.0000 


1.0000 


1 .0000 


43* 


5 


1 .0246 


1.0257 


1 .0286 


h^ 


10 


1.0528 


1.0531 


1.0647 


e,bi 


1.5 


1.0804 


1.0858 


1.1045 


77 


20 


1.1120 


1.1156 


1. 1528 


88^. 


25 


1.1473 


1.1538 


1.2 II 4 


r)9» 


30 


1.18G7 


1.1997 


1.6100- 


110} 


25 


1.2316 


1.25i 


1.98 for 


i22 


4.0 


1.2838 


1.326 


^r 


1^3^ 


45 


1.3446 


1.418 




144^ 


50 


1.4166 


1.548 




1551- 
167 


55 

60 


1.501^3 
1.6198 


1.73 
2.01 




178| 


^5 


1.7872 


2.50 




isQJ- 


70 


1.94:j8 


3.49 




'200| 


75 


2.1351 


6.63 




212 


80 


2.3574 


Infinite. 





From the above tables, it appears that my 
numbers are incomparably nearer to Schmidt's 
than those given by Mr. Kirw^n, which are 
represented as Schmidt's. — Unfortunately Mr. 
Gough has built a good deal on this table, has 
given us another at page 423 founded on it, 
has given it a decided preference to mine ; but 
immediately after he tells us that all he has 
obtained from it is suspected of inaccuracy. 

Mr. Kirwan, like other men, is fallible j 
he has certainly coftiroittcd an oversight in 



a7i(i on the Expansion of Moist Air. 431 

drawing up tlic table in question, which it 
would be easy in mc to point out ; but I do not 
desire so invidious a task ; more especially re- 
specting one who has so well deserved of the 
philosophical world ; only I would take this 
opportunity to caution others from taking too 
much upon credit, when they may easily sa- 
tisfy tliemselvcs from their own experience. 

Schmidt*s apparatus, and mode of experi- 
ment, which was my particular inquiry, come 
next to be noticed. — The apparatus was on a 
simple ])rinciple ; being nothing more than a 
common barometer tube, having a bulb turned 
up at the lower end, to whith a glass vessel 
or two could be adapted containing water or 
steam, and having proper istop-cocks, &c. by 
means ofs^vhich stealm could be driven into the 
bulb and made to expel the whole or any pan 
of the contained air ; when this \n^ iddiie tluj 
whole was made air-tight and immersejd iijtrt 
water of :\T ; the condensation of the stcani 
left the air inclosed to support such a coluinw 
of mercury as it was able, which was i>oticetl ; 
the whole apparatus was then im'ntersed in 
water of any oiher temperature, and the rise 
of the mercury indicated the expa-iision arising 
from both air and vapour. The result of Iws 
3d experiment on this head follows, which is 
the one he most relies on. See page 34v3i 



432 ^ Jiemarh mjWxed Gnsrs, 



rEMi*i:u,vn;Bn. : 


EXPANSION Of A! 




WATEU. 




'< i. ' / : 


K:,:'iin.,;. 


Indies (frcncli). 


(^'^ 


15:^8 '-" 


],) 


17.30 


20 


17.80 


25 


18.58 


30 


19.S2 


:i'> 


20.. S.') 


•to 


21.47 


43 


22,40 


50 


24.58 


55 


2r).70 


00 


2!). 02 


G5 


.'34.00 



' Above the temperature of 65° Mr. Schmidt 
seems to think! the force of steam in air the 
same' .as the force of pure steam of the same 
temperature ; which is the principle I maintain 
for the -whole scale; but below that temper- 
ature he infers from teh above table, compared 
with that shewing the expansion of pure steam, 
that steam mixed -or combined (whichever it 
be) with air, has less force than when pure. — 
This* deviation arises from his operating with 
a variable pressure; if he had done in the 
manner ihavc, namely, have kept a uniform 
atmospheric pressure at all temperatures, and 
marked the expansion accordingly, he would 
have found, as I did, that the expansive force 
of vapour in any part of the scale of temper- 
ature is precisely the same when mixed with 



and on the Expamion of Moist Air. 433 

any kind of air as when j)ure : Indeed by his 
own method, it is evidently so at that point 
where the pressure was equal to 'J« or 30 
inches ; that is, about the temperature 60 
or (55'. 

Mr. Gough will hence be enabled to learn 
how far he and I have been misled by my 
theon' when we both calculated that Schmidt 
made his experiments on air of 1.5 or 16 inches 
of pressure. '^-^ 

, Upon looking over the numbers Mr. Schmidt 
has given for the expansion of moist air, it is 
evident he has gone upon the supposition that 
the space occupied by any volume of moist air 
(or rather air confined by water) is inversely as 
the pressure. Thus, the space occupied by 1 
measure of dry air at a given pressure and tem- 
j>erature oi 32'^, being 1.3574, at 212% he infers 
ihat by admitting water to it the space would 
become 2.3574 ; that is, according to him, if 
1,000 part of air at 32** and 28 inches pressure 
be heated to 212% it will require a pressure of 
38.0072 Inches to retain it in the same space 
by reason of its increased elasticity ; and if to 
¦ this, water be admitted, it will then require 
the addition of 28 inches more, or 66.0072, 
to retain it in tlie same space (see page 351). 
Now this last is strictiy true in fact-, but the 
former by no means follows as a consequence^ 



434 , llemarks on Mixed Gases ^ 

because, a mixture of air and vapour in the 
above circumstances is difFcrent in regard to 
the law of elasticity from dry air ; namely, the 
space is not inversely as th^ pressure. Mr. 
Gough can make no difficulty of deciding this 
point with his bottle ; for if he hold it with the 
mouth downward in boiling water for a few 
minutes, on cooling the water it will ascend so 
as to fill the whole bottle nearly, and there 
will not remain 4^ of the original air according 
to Schmidt's table. 

From what has been said, it will appear that 
\ consider Schmidt's table of the expansion of 
mojst air as essentially wrong ; I would not, 
however, be understood to depreciate the rest 
of his work, which appears, from what I have 
seen of it, to be very ingenious and valuable. 

I shall now conclude with a few observa- 
tions on Mr. Gough's two Essays. — All the 
abstruse investigation of the centre of gravity. 
Sec. at page 299 and seq. is altogether su- 
perfluous ; because every one must admit as a 
tjeif-evident truth, the deduction from it at 
page 301 . The observation commencing page 
302 is a complete contradiction in terms; to 
allow the particles of two dastic fluids to be 
inelastic towards each other, at the same time 
that given r(;//^W6'jr of such fluids are not so; seems 
to be the same thing as allowing that the xvJiote 



CJid on fQ Tlxpansion of Moist Air. 435 

ictidrvis not the effect of the action of the indi- 
virtual particles, which is to mo inconceivable. 
Yet It is upon this the author fixes the main 
spring of his argumentation. The transparency 
of the atmosphere (page 309) merits no notice. 
An' experiment is brought forward at page 313, 
to Jirove that vapour flowing through air open 
to the atmosphere actually expands the air ; 
on which my observations are given at page 413. 
The most important observation in both essays, 
however, 16 at page 421, where Mr. Gough 
clearly demonstrates that he has been all the 
while combatting a chimera : by insisting that 
u})on my theory vapour cannot move the par- 
ticles of air unless its force is equal to atmo- . 
spheric pressure, he makes it manifest he does ^ 
not understand the fundamental principle. I 
never made it a part of my system to conceive, 
that if a particle of any one gas was actually ia 
contact and pressing like an inelastic body on 
a particle of another kind of gas, that it pre- 
vented the simultaneous action of a kindred 
proximate particle : Tlius, if three equidistant 
particles of gas j, cr, tf, in the same horizontal 
tine are kept in equilibrium by the action of a 
surrounding system of particles ; and if any 
particle, (;, of another gas be in contact and 
made to press on the middle particle a, in the 
horizontal direction ; I never imagined that 
3 I 



436 • ^ RG7\^}*ks miMx^i Gases, 

i\\is \ gresswrAj, > J^^d -^nj^rii^fluenGc^' whatever: h\ 
modifyjng tb$ ^^^^9^} 9^ : ^^^^} proximate pa|-- 
ticles, g^ on tjie i^^jjcjdle.one^j. except so far, as 
that it might hicr/sase or diminish their distance; 
t^ej mutual , action of ho,m9gene,0U5 particksjj 
always considered;^ 43^^ j;esembHng magnetic 
^ction,: which. is not affected hy whatever othpK 
action takes place, or whatjever other body iIV 
terveJ^les..7— i jihould certainly have enlarged oi\ 
this he^d previously, if I had at all imagined 
Mr, Gougb M^as under any misapprehensioui 
pr hafj not read thq illustration 1 gave in 
Nichplson^s Journal, vol. 3, page 267, ;2^|*/ 
scries y which was written about a year after 
the original annunciation of the theory in hi$ 
4ta Journal for 180K 



{Correction of an Error in Ihbk at pagc'-ZVl.) . 

l::\ Since the Table at page 272' Hv^ i ]^rinted' ' ofl? I - Have 
discovered that the, quajitity of carbg|it)c oxide gas absorbed 
hy water is about ¦jg-th of its bulk, not ^'^th, as there state^ : 
it is the only i^as I have yet found that is anomalous in this 
respect. 







m 



LISl' OF BOOKS, &c 

" ' MUgsENTEO TO 

/8 .008/ .l^L'.M'i 
£n»y>«gMr.'I^O CIE TY. 
' ; fioifr.nij'jiV 



o'J •>Hl -t 



Jhtt^tcukPfiiksopkmUSoc'itij/, < Transactions of the. Ainc- 

' • rican Philosophical Society, 

held at Philadelphia, for pvo* 

i inoting useful knowledge. 

- Vol. I. II. V. &VI. Philad. 

Society hf Antiquaries q/i'Loti- Some account of the Ab- 

(lon. ufnioq bey Church of Bath, ^vith 

' ' Plans, Elevations and Sections 

ofthat huiidiug. Loud. 179^. 

. ¦ A . r . O ^, ,1 III ,nii\} . [ Figures of an- Antique 

^ 'I offj r Helmet and mask of Br9nze, 

. tr.m'ici/ and other Aiitiquitits, dis* 

covered at Ribchester, in 
•/i <?noxiiiVK,. V ..',/. .^Dca^hu*e* LoimUJ?^!). , 
> UinJ I rj i i [ III I i n ¦¦ !<) Some account of the Ca- 
thedral Church of Durham, 
' ^vith Plans, Elevations, and 

Sections of that Building. 
U)ndon^l801. 

Mr* John Bufiks* On the Power* of ^ia- 

..hine, &c. Lond. 1803.8®. 



4-3S List of Books i Sfc. 

Messrs. Cadcll ^ Davks^ The Imperial Review ; or 

London, Edinburgh & Dub- 
lin Literary Journal. No* 

J. Redman Care, M. D, An Inaugural Essay on In- 

flammation. — Philad. 1794. 

.,^_^ . , \ ' ••' i'Al l Ajs^ort Vr^^lof|^the Iniw 

portance and Respectability 
ol- Xhpi Science of Medicine* 
Philad. 1800. 8'. 

, ^ — , . ¦ > U ?Kpi-actlc£fcl\01>servations on 

Vaccination ; or Inoculation 
^ tor the Cow-pox. Philad. 

1802. 8.^. 
Ii€v. Thomas Gisboniet A. M. SetstioM; Si MoJ, toid, 

, 1802—4. 8<>. 
Johnson Grant, A. B, A Sermoi;i preached in the 

Parish Church of Wan-ington* 
on Wednesday, 19th Oct, 
18^3i being* the day a}> 
pointed for . a General Fast, 
..H-. v. ; .->...- Lond, 8<=*. 

^ytE^^Green. Observations on tho 

Bramfr. -I.€m4, 4^3- -S''^ - 
Edivtitd HafrzsmyM D. An Inquiry into the Rot 

in Sheep and other Animals, 
Lond, 1804, 8^. 
Charles HatcJittt, E$tji' F. R. S. Analytical Experiments & 

Obsprrtttiona on Lae ? Load, 
1804. 4<'. 

Analysis of Magnetiqal 
PyrittiS. Lond. 

On an artificial Substanpe 
V. hich posscsisc^thfc pHlicipevl 
















characteristic" Properties fif 
Tannin. 

. . 1 , . Additional Remarks, &r, 

Lond. 1305. 4«>. 

Mr. IVilliam Henry, A Scries of Fopuior CUt mJF* 

cal Essays, By Fenwick 
Skiimshlre, M. D. 2 Voli*. 
Lond, 1802. 8*. 

._ — -¦ ¦ — . — , — Experiments on the Quan* 

tity of Gases ahsorbcd by 
Water at ditlerent Tempera- 
tures, &, uadu: differeut pres- 
sures. Lond. 1801. \°, 

lAikc Jloiiurdf Es^, On the Modifications of 

Clouds, and on the Princi* 
pies Pt' .tl»^k ProdactioQ> Sos* 
• pension and. Destruction, 

London. .1803. 8<>. 

ji.Himt€r,MM.FM.S.L.Cf£. Georgical Essays. 6 YoU 

Lond, 1S04. S^, 

RqyaUashAcaJcmi/, The Transactions of the 

Royal Irish Academy; ^o\^ 
Vlh. Dublin. 1802. 4'. 

77ios, Mmthayn, Esq, Tr. L. S, Entoraologia Britanuicii. 

Vol, LLond. 1802. 8-. 

Tlio, Perdral, M. D. F.R.S.^c, Medical Ethics ; or, a code 

of Institutes and Precepts 
adapted to the Professional 
Conduct of Physicians and 
Surgeons; lx)nd. 1803. 8''. 
Mr,JohnRini;, A Treatise on the Cow. 

pox ; containing the History 
of Vaccine Inoculation, &.c. 
Part 2d. Lond. 1803, 8«, 



440 



J:iist -Of BM^, Vs'r. 



C, Schreibm/^M* I>. 



Mr. H'. Smmons. 



Historical and Anatomical 

- Description of a Doiibtlul 
Amphibious Animal of Grr- 

- many. 
Reflections on the W^-o- 

priety of performing the dv- 
sarean Operation; to wh^ch arc 
added, 01)servations on Can- 
txT ; and ExperimeHts mi tlui 
. supposed Origin of the Cow - 
/ pox. Lond. 1798. 8"^. 
4- A Detection of the Fallacy 
of Dr. Hull's Defence of the 
Cesarean. pp.e\-ation, Lomh 
. . > 8^. 

Sbcleti/for the EncoumgementdJ' Transactions of the Society^ 
Arts,SfC. Instituted at London, for the 

Encouragement of Arts, Ma- 
nufactures ¦ bud Commeircev 
..ci .JKjoJ 20 Vols. Lond. 1789—1802. 
. .. /iT f^fiT 80. .v;n-i^)v,-.U. .¦. , •, 

C. ]k, mikinson, E-^'^' 






i The Elements of Galvanism 
^ in Theory and Practice, 



sVok. Lohd.ja03. 8«" 



iO 



ljt;Cii; 



•i N D J'. .\. 

— ioecee— - 

Absorption of p-.ises by water, ^c. — in ([uantity fof- 
. lows u stilt n! h\\ /jttgt i27 l-— ot' atinosplicric air i* y^ytti 

nevuiy, not alli-ctcd hy tcinpLiuture catcria 

paribus, , ^.iscs by n)<>!>l luiuujs is Hi,ar|y: jhe 

samr, 27.5 — is as tlie prtssurc, 2vS(). 
Air 4tt>A tMoistuPc, (expands muitsi than ?liynirMty h«rt# 

313 — tables oKrhfc expansion of, 1-30. j 

^¦•'^•\M>FK, Dr. on opium, 1. , ^ 

V Vapour At,mosphcrCf qujlntit'y of hsccrtalnecl^ 23 J/ 
j4iim,.\phcret on tli6 proportion ontsok'iiicuts, 'J.OO, ' ' 
Atoms, or ulriniht^^particUs of Boiiics, tab!e 6f the'^elhlive 

Avcightsot*, 287. 

BARnsLr.V, Dr. o\f|)o|.ularsj)i;il.^ ;u:tl e\< ;......,, i .;. 

'Bones of animdl.*? tingL'd bj'oaiingniaddiM-, &c. !.>(). 
Boii/i'^, an!nr.uivei*sions on the practice of, 202. 
Jiull-Jii^/Us, origin of, 174. — rcMnajks m the crullty of, 19S, 

Caoutchouc, has it:? temperature iiirreased by artificial cx- 

teiLsion, 2t)0 — rcjnarks on the elasticity of, 293. 
Carbonic acid ascends into hydrogen, &c. 2(il. 
Carbonic acid Atmosphere, quautily of y>icertaine«l, J;l. 
Cock'Ji^hting, origin of, 174, 

Dalton, Mr. on thr^ proportion of the gases constitutinjf 
tlie atmosphere*, '2^\ — on the tendency of elastic fluids 
to dillusion thi-ough each other, 25D— on the absorption 
of gases by water, &.c. 271 — on Mr. Gough's essayiv 
aiid oil Mr. Schmidt's experiments on tlie expansion i\J" 
moist air by heat, 42 j. 

Epic Poem, on the mrfchinerj' of tlie dncieut, 9S. 
'Etidionictiy, various methods of, 247. 

Gases absorbed by >vater mechanicalij/ and not chemical 1 1/, 

283. 
Gibson, Mr. on tht? cflcct of matfder rortt on t^ 

14(i — on tlie use of sutures in the skulls of uuiiii 
Gladiators, remarks on, 178. ,,^ .^ 

GoLiGn, Mr. on caoutchouc, 288r-0|^ mixed .g^s.imd 

vapour, 296 — his reply to Mr. DALTON'sobjections) 405. 
Grant, Rev. Johnson A. B. on reverie, 213. 

History, on the moral influence oT, 328 — reflections on, 35% 



4i2 / .V D E X, 

MoLLWD, Rev. John, on history and historians, 359, 

Jluntiw^y remarks on the diversion of, 189 

Ifi/drogcn gas descends into atmospheric air, &c. 262,^ 

KlRWAK, Mr* on moist air, 430* 

Mixed GaseSi essay on the theory of, 296— reply to some 
objections to tJie theory of, 405 — remarks on Mr. 
Goi'Gh's essays onj 425. 

j\7<ro?/«" GaSi its use, in eudiometry, 249 — combines in 
proportions as 1 to 2 with oxygen, 250. 

Opium exhausts irritability — effects of it conveyed inde- 
pendent of the rirclilationofthe blood, 24 — acts directly 
on the nervous system, 25 — is a stimulant, 97. 

TJdlosoph/f on natural and moral, 378. 

Priestley, Dr. remarkable experimentsof his of the trans* 
mission of air and steam through earthenware tubes, ex- 
plained, 2G9. 

liner ie and abstraction compared, 214 — remedies for it, 
225, ct seq. 

'Stdativc, powers termed so, 78 — defined — opposite to sti- 
mulants, 95. 

iScHMiDT, remarks on his experiments on moist air, 425 — 
his tables of expansion of moist air, 430—432. 

5/;ec7"/ic g7Y/r///6'.^ of various gases, 255, 

fitafpiant water usually contains little oxygenous gas, 275. 

Siomach of animals, etiects of opium, spirit of wine and 
spirit, vol. aromat. on the, 48. 

Sulphuret of Lime provisionally good in eudiometry, 251. 

Sutures, use of, 317. 

Table of the weights of the gases constituting the atmo- 
sphere, 256 — of the proportional weights of air in a 
given volume, 257 — of the relative weights of ultimate 
particles, 287 — of the expansion of moist air, 430 — 432. 

Volta's eudiometer recommended, 25 1 . 

Walker, the Rev. George, F. R. S. on the machinery of 
the ancient epic poem, 98 — on the moral influence of 
history, 328 — on natural and moral philosophy, 378. 



Pj;;>tcii bv S. RusscU, Maachestw, 



' t^.-mg^fSfiiimti- 




