Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



• A 



¦J 









X 

I ¦ 



'J&» 



• ¦ » 



I ¦ 



' j. 



r " 



\ ''¦ ' 



.- ; ( 



' '1, 



¦¦ I 



^- %- '' i^ e^i^ t^/:^^Jec/^ «a^, 



\ 



r/T<yp-^ 



Vol. I. 




Part I. 



PROCEEDINGS 



* ¦ 

4 



OF THK 



Botanital ^oetetp tA 2.ontron, 



CONTAINING 



4 



r^jfecOEDS OF THE .MEETINGS OF THE SOCIETY SINCE ITS ESTA- 



f- 



BLISHMENT, JULY 1836, TO NOVEMBER 1838; TOGETHER 

WITH THE SEVERAL ORIGINAL PAPERS ON LOCAL 

AND GENERAL BOTANY, v!tc. 



WITH PLATES. 



\ 



Srintttr ftp <©r^er of i%t Council. 



LONDON: 
DARTON AND CLARK, HOLBORN HILL. 

1839. 





^^ 




Price 6i. Od. — To Members, if obiahicd of the Secretin- ' : • 

V 

¦i . 

« 1 



* > 



, V <••¦ 










CONTENTS. 



N.B, — All Letters and Communications for the^Sodet 
Secretary, ttpitfMiMMMHWmilfi^Msfipiaritaii^ 




^^. 



^^ 



COMMtTNIC ATI0N8 . 

Pa OK' 

I. On the Influence of Light upon the common Broad Bean, 
with the results of an Experiment made in order to ascertain 
whether Coloured Fluids are taken up hy the Roots of Plants, by 
D. Cooper^ A.L.S., Curator. (With a Plate.) 3 

II. On the Importance of Local Botany, by A. Irvine 6 

III. A Notice of Plants growing spontaneously on and about 
Warley, Essex, by Dr. uEneas Maclntyre, F.L.S 16 

IV. On the Rarer Rants of Deal, Kent, G. E. Defines F.L.S. 21 

V. On the Distribution of Plants in Battersea Fields, Surrey, 
by Daniel Cooper, A.L.S., Curator '. 22 

VI. Notes on Plants found near Bristol, by T. Hancock 25 

VII. Hints on the Importance and Practicability of adopting 
«ia more Systematic Method in Describing and Arranging the 

Species of Plants, by Joseph Freeman 28 

VIII. Notes on Lamium maculatum, by T. Hancock...: 32 

IX. On the Flora of Chelmsford, Essex, by A . Wallis 34 

X. On Victoria Regina, by R. Schomburgk. (With two Plates) 44 

XI. On Loranthus Smythii, hy R. Schomburgk 47 

XII. On the Influence of Barometric pressure on Plants, &c. 
by Mr. Woods 54 

XIII. On Hybridity occurring in Ferns, translated from M. 
Marten's Paper, by PT. /f. PF^^tYe 55 

XIV. On a New Species of Epilobium by M. Den Kalaar .... 58 

XV. Reply to M. Marten's Paper on the Hybridity of Ferns, 
by J. Riley 60 

XVI. On the Triplaris Americana, (Ant Tree of Guiana) 
by R.H. Schomburgk, (With a Plate.) 62 

XVII. Onthe Genus Myosotis, by ^. IF«//«5 66 

XVIII. On BerthoUetia Excelsa, (with Two Plates) hy R. H. 
Schomburgk 71 

XIX. Details of the First Excursion made by the Members of 
the Society, 1838, by Daniel Cooper 74 

XX. On a Principle of Fencing formed according to the Laws 
of Vegetable Physiology, by Daniel Cooper 76 

XXI Translation of Dr. Unger's Paper, on the Formation of 
Crystals in the Cellules of Plants 80 

XXII. Details of an Excursion from Woolwich Kent, to Cob- 
ham and Cuxton... 82 

XXIII. On the Advantage of Botanical Statistics, by IV. '] 
M. Chatterley 87 i 

XXIV. Extract from the President's Address, read November \ 
29th 1838 92 

List of Members 99 



5 




feautfi 



yT^.-s^i^T^'^^rT'y::^ 



"^Vg^k^jSl^V^ 



¦ - • 



.1:1 

¦¦si 



¦ .-.I 

¦•¦-- ? 



' • vtf C 



''^i 



\ 



I'tailti i^JSaJir. 



f 



^PROCEEDINGS 



OK 



THE BOTANICAL SOCIETY 



Of 



LONDON. 



^rintelf 6^ <@vtKet of tfyt Council. 



LONDON: 

DARTON AND CLARK, HOLBORN HILL. 

/ 

I 

\ 



J 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 



At a Meeting of the Practical Botanists in London^ con- 
vened by Mr. Daniel Cooper, on the 27th July 1836, at the 
Crown and Anchor Tavern Strand, for the purpose of 
taking into consideration the propriety of establishing a 
Botanical Society in the Metropolis, 

Mr. White having been unanimously called to the chair, 
it was proposed by Mr. Daniel Cooper, and seconded by 
Mr. W. M. Chatterley, that a Society be formed for the ex- 
clusive cultivation of Botanical Science, — to be called the 
Practical Botanists* Society op London, which name 
was afterwards altered by the Provisional Committee ap- 
pointed on that evening, to the Botanical Society op 
London. In accordance with the views entertained by the 
Provisional Committee, the following notice was issued to 
the several Botanists in London : 

^^ By the advice and sanction of some eminent Botanists, 
it is proposed to form a Society, under the above name ; the 
objects of which are, the advancement of Botanical Science 
in general, but more especially. Descriptive and Systematic 
Botany, by the reading of original and other Papers on the 
habitats, particular characters, &c. of Plants ; by the formation 
of a Library, Museum and Herbarium, for reference and 
exchange of specimens. 

*^ Several Oentlemen, friendly to such a Society, have held 
some preparatory Meetings, and drawn up regulations for 
its government, which will be submitted to a General 
Meeting, at the Croum and Anchor Tavern, in the Strand, 



2 PROGBEDINGS OF tHE 

on Wednesday Evening y \2th October, at Eight o^ Clock pre^ 
cisely, when the nature and objects of the Society will be 
more fully explained. 

" The attendance of those who may be willing to promote 
the Science in any way, is respectfully invited. It is pro- 
posed that Ladies be admitted Members, with a full partici- 
pation in the advantages of the Library, &c. 

20thy Sep. 1836. W. M. Chatterley, 

Hon. Sec. pro tem.^^ 

The two following Meetings were occupied in appointing 
Committees, preparing the laws requisite for governing the 
Society, and making the necessary preliminary arrangements. 

The following Prospectus was then agreed to by the Com- 
mittee, and issued to the different Botanists in London and 
its vicinity : 

"Societies for the cultivation of Natural History gene- 
rally, for the cultivation of Horticultural Botany particularly, 
for the cultivation also of Medical Botany, are already in 
existence in this metropolis, but no Society especially de- 
voted to general Botanical Science has hitherto been insti- 
tuted. The advantages of a Society of the last-mentioned 
description, will probably be admitted by every one who has 
the slightest acquaintance with Botany, and will, without 
doubt, be acceptable to all who are desirous of obtaining in- 
formation on the various subjects which will necessarily 
come under the consideration of such a Society. 

" A number of gentlemen, having seriously considered the 
many desirable results which such a Society cannot fail to 
produce, and having fully decided upon the necessity, have 
instituted, ^The Botanical. Society op London,' for 
the promotion of the following objects, viz. : 

" L To concentrate the labours of individual Botanists, by 
holding stated Meetings in some central situation, with as 
little expense as possible to the Members, where each may 
communicate his information, and receive that of others in 
return. 

" IL To read Original Papers, and Translations of Foreign 
Memoirs of importance, on Botanical subjects, at the Ordi- 
naiy Meetings of the Society, 

" in. To examine and describe all plants, that have not 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 8 

hitherto been accurately described, and to communicate the 
results at the Ordinary Meetings, of the Society ; and by a 
separate examination of the same plants, by di^erent persons, 
produce a series of accurate descriptions of genera and spe- 
cies, which could not possibly have been done without such 
a co-operation of scientific Botanists. 

" IV. To publish these descriptions and other transactions, 
as often as may be deemed expedient. 

"V. To form Herbaria of British and Foreign plants, for 
the reference of the Members, and exchange with other So- 
cieties or individual collectors, and thus be the means of pro- 
ducing many valuable Herbaria, which otherwise would not 
have been completed or even commenced. 

" VI. To form a Library and Museum. 

^ This Society consists of Resident, Corresponding, Fo- 
reign, Life, and Honorary Members.*' 






NOVEMBER 3rd. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., in the Chair. 

Mr. Daniel Cooper communicated a Paper, being the re- 
sult of some observations ^^ On the influence of light upon 
the common broad-beany with the remits of an eaiperiment 
made «» order to ascertain whether coloured fluids are 
taken up by the roots of plants,^ Mr. Cooper thus com- 
mences : — 

Not having heard of any experiments that had been made 
on the watering of plants with coloured fluids, and entertain- 
ing in my own mind some opinion respecting the separation 
of fluids by the spongioles of the roots, I made the above 
plant the subject of experiment. Reasoning from analogy it 
appeared to me that if spongioles had the power of absorbing 
silica, lime, sulphur, magnesia, &c., as is stated by Schrader, 
by watering plants reared in a place which was totally ex- 
cluded from the action of light (and thereby rendering 
them blanched) with solutions of colouring matter, if the 
coloured fluid should be imbibed by the spongioles, the plant 
possibly might exhibit a singular appearance, I procured a 

B 2 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

plant possessing a large quantity of cellular tissue, and, with 
these views, commenced the following experiments : — 

Having procured three garden pots, I placed three com* 
mon broad beans in each of them, on the I7th of Feb- 
ruary, 1835, the earth contained in two of them being 
composed of ordinary garden mould, finely sifted, while the 
remaining one was filled with common house-sand, perfectly 
dry, which was selected for the pui-pose of observing whether 
coloured fluids were imbibed by the roots of plants. This 
pot, with one of the others filled with garden mould, was 
placed in a cellar were light had not access ; while the re- 
maining one was placed in an apartment where daylight 
could easily enter. They were all watered with an equal 
quantity of fluid, but the one containing the sand in the 
dark apartment was moistened with common water, holding 
in solution a large quantity of madder : it was a dark co- 
loured and strong infusion. I thought it better to use a 
vegetable colouring matter, for this reason: that metallic 
solutions act upon plants somewhat as they do upon animals : 
and, moreover, it ^ould have been necessary to produce a 
considerable degree of colour, which would require a very 
strong solution of any metallic substance : and the stronger 
the solution, the more deleterious the action would have been 
on the vegetable tissue. Sufiice it to say, that the plant wa- 
tered with the infusion of madder did not exhibit a different 
appearance from the other plant placed by its side, which was 
supplied with common water. Had any sickly appearance 
been produced by the madder, it would instantly have been 
perceived by comparing the two specimens which were 
placed under circumstances otherwise as nearly analogous as 
possible. The beans being put at the same distance from 
the surface of the mould in all the pots, I was rather curious 
to know which would show its plumule first, the one placed 
in the dark, or the other exposed to the action of daylight ; 
the one grown in the daylight was the first to show its plu- 
mule by three days. The plumules of those sown in the 
light were of a green colour, while those in the dark were of 
a straw or light yellow colour. The growth of the stem of 
those plants which vegetated in the dark, exhibited the fol- 
lowing pecuUarities : It was developed at a much greater 
rate than those in the daylight in the propoi*tion of three 
inches to one, but was much softer, and the cells were consi- 
derably larger ; but I could not discover the slightest traces 
of the colouring matter in the stems of those watered with 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. i> 

madder, even with a powerful Microscope. Another pecu- 
liarity was, that the nodi were fewer, and no development 
approaching to a perfect leaf could be observed ; rudimen- 
tary leaves were to be seen, and even more developed than 
those in the accompanying figure (PI. 1, Fig. 1.) of a light 
yellow colour. Beneath these nodi were observed light 
purple or slate coloured spots. In the specimens reared in 
the daylight, more than eight leaf-buds could be distin- 
guished, while those excluded from the light developed one 
leaf-bud at a distance of eight or nine inches from the co- 
tyledon ; and,- at the summit of the stem, a number were 
crowded together in the same rudimentary state. The coty- 
ledons of the specimen reared in the dark, remained nearly, 
if not quite the same distance, below the surface of the 
mould, as when originally placed there ; while in the other 
specimens they rose to the surface. On comparing the 
two specimens, it was noticed that about two inches above 
the cotyledons of the specimen produced in the dark had 
evidently been buried in the earth, for fibres were observed 
issuing from the lower part of the stem; (see PI. 1. Fig. 2.) 
while in the opposite one, the stem proceeds directly from 
the cotyledons, and no fibres were observed above the coUum 
or neck, a circumstance worthy of remark ; proving that the 
cotyledon remained stationary, and was not uplifted to the 
surface of the earth, as happened in the specimens grown 
under ordinary circumstances. (PL I. Fig. 3.) 

Haying satisfied myself of the great difierence of growth 
exhibited by this plant, under the circumstances which have 
been related, I reversed the order of things ; brought the 
specimen from the dark into daylight, and vice vers&, when 
neither flourished for any considerable space of time. The 
specimens placed in the light, the day after their removal, 
became flaccid ; the next day they could not support their 
own weight, and bent double, the tips of the imperfectly 
formed leaves began to be tinted of a green colour. The fol- 
lowing day, dark brown or chocolate coloured marks ap- 
peared under the leaf-buds ; and in four and twenty hours 
from that time, the leaves were dying ofl^, and the stem was 
soon entirely withered. A similar effect was also observed 
in the specimen reared in the daylight, when placed in the 
dark apartment. From the time of its introduction, a gra- 
dual withering took place ; and at the end of five days, it did 
not exhibit the slightest appearance of vitality. 

Mr. Wilkinson informed me of a curious fact connected 



PROCBSDINOS OF THE 

with this subject^ with regard to a pptatoe, which had by 
chance fallen into a well of 12 feet or more deep. He 
stated that he was one day surprised at seeing a white stem- 
like body creeping out of a hole^ in some boards that were 
placed over the well; anxious to observe its progress, he 
allowed it to pursue its course, which would obviously tend 
towards the strongest light, the stem soon became of a 
green hue, and leaves appeared on the axis ; the plant, he 
says, showed every sign of flowering. Wishing to see from 
whence this specimen came, he removed the covering of the 
well, and cautiously drawing up the slender white leafless 
stem from the bottom, (12 feet) succeeded in obtaining the 
potatoe. This is a very interesting fact, for it shows to what 
extent plants will elongate in order to seek for light. 

From this it appears that plants will flourish after their 
axes have been developed to a considerable length, provided 
they gradually become exposed to the rays of the sun ; but 
when they are suddenly removed from darkness into light 
they wither and perish in a short time. 

Explanation of Plate I. 

Fig, 1 . — Represents a portion of the stem grown in the dark, showing 
the slight development of the rudimentary leaves. 

Fig. 2. — Exhibits the lower part of Fig. 1, showing the fibres issuing 
from the stem above the cotyledon, together with the cotyledon 
and root. 

Fig. 3. — TTie lower part of the stem grown under ordinary circum- 
stances as contrasted with Fig. 2. 



NOVEMBER 17th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., in the Chair. 

Mr. A.. Irvine communicated the following Paper, '^ On the 
importance of Local Botany : ^^ — 

The object of this Memoir is, to ofler certain facts respecting 
Local Botany, and to draw from thepce a few inferences, 
from all of which you may be able to judge of its importance^ 
in relation to the general subject. 



BOTANICAL BOOIETY OF LONDON. 7 

Of the multitude of species growing in all parts of the 
earthy and forming what is commonly termed the vegetable 
kingdom^ only a very small number in proportion to the 
whole, can be collected in any particular district or country. 
But the amount of species in any one county, or National 
Mora, constitutes a great proportion of other Floras, whether 
provincial or territorial, especially of such as are in conti- 
guous regions. The liumber of vascular species, sponta- 
neously growing within twenty-five or thirty miles of Lon- 
don, equal in amount two-thirds of British plants of the 
same kind. They are more than double of the number in 
the Flora Lapponnica. They exceed the number in Sweden ; 
form one-half of the German Flora ; rather above one-third 
of the Austrian Flora ; and about one-fourth of the French 
Flora. 

As all these countries, with the exception of part of Swe- 
den, the whole of Lapland, and the South of France, lie in 
the same parallels of Latitude, the species found in any one 
of them will generally constitute part of the species of the 
others. For example, most of the Lapland plants are natives 
of Sweden. The greater pai*t of the Swedish plants will be 
found in Germany. The German plants again constitute a 
large portion of the Floras of Austria and France. Nearly 
all our British plants grow in these continental kingdoms, 
with considerable additions of species, genera, and even fa- 
milies. Our insular situation has formed a barrier to the 
migration of many European species and genera, although 
our climate be suitable for their preservation and propa- 
gation. 

If we compare our Flora with Intra-Tropical Floras, we 
shall perceive an immense decrease in the number of common 
species. A section of the Peninsula of Hindustan, extending 
from Lat. 9*" to 19° north, according to Wight and Arnott 
produces two thousand eight hundred Phsenogamous species, 
of which not above thirty are natives of this country. In 
the Western Hemisphere, the Tropical Flora of America, by 
Humboldt and Bonpland, comprises six thousand species of 
which not one Dicotyledonous plant is found even in Europe, 
and only a very few of the Monocotyledonous species. 
Receding from the Equator in both Hemispheres, the pro- 
portion increases. The North American Flora contains four 
hundred European species, and the Flora of New Holland 
or New South Wales one hundred. These facts prove that 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

species disperse farther in an easterly or westerly direction 
than towards the Equator. 

Now if we compare the genera of the above mentioned 
Floras or countries, we shall find that they (viz. genera) have 
a wider range than species : that is, are more extensively 
dispersed over the earth ; that in remote regions there are 
many more common genera than common species, and in 
contiguous countries that the genera bear to each other a 
much higher proportion than the species. The number of 
British genera of vascular plants is four hundred and sixty ; 
of these four hundred, or five-sixths of the whole are the pro- 
duce of the country round London, limited as above. And 
taking the London species at one thousand, and the British 
at one thousand five hundred, we find that the species in- 
crease as 2 : 3, and the genera as 5 : 6 only. 

The Austrian Flora of Host, which may be taken as a 
mean proportional, both in number of species and range of 
temperature, between the German and French Floras, com- 
prises about three thousand three hundred species, and seven 
hundred genera ; amongst which almost every British genus 
and species will be found. Hence we perceive that the Bri- 
tish and Austrian species are to each other as 15 : 33, and 
the genera as 23 : 35 ; or fewer than one half of the British 
species are found in Austria. But about two-thirds of the 
genera. The number of genera common to Britain and 
India, according to the Indian Flora above mentioned, is 
about one hundred and twenty, although the common spe- 
cies hardly amount to thirty. The proportion of genera to 
species being as 4 : 1. 

From these statements, the following consequences may 
be legitimately deduced, viz. : that a person well acquainted 
with British plants, or even with those found in the London 
district, will readily recognize almost all the plants of Lap- 
land and Sweden, above one-half of the German species, 
one-third of the Austrian, and one-fourth of the French. 
¦^, And as genera are more extensively dispersed than species, 

the London Botanist, by knowing the plants of his own 
district, can refer to their proper genera one thousand three 
hundred British species, about two thousand five hundred 
Austrian, and three thousand French species. 

From similar data it can be shown that about two thou- 
sand species of the Equinoctial plants of America are re- 
ferable to their proper genera by British Botanists, and also 
that the generic characters of three thousand Hindustani 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 9 

plants may be known from the knowledge of the London 
genera. Also that six thousand plants of the whole number 
on the earth, may be safely ascribed to their proper 
genera, supposing the whole number of vascular species to 
be sixty thousand; and this can be done by any Botanist 
who is well acquainted with the genera that grow within a 
moderate walk of his own residence. Even the Flora of a 
moderately extensive parish will generally embrace one-half 
of the species and two-third of the genera to be found in the 
kingdom. 

As genera have been shown to occupy a much larger extent 
than species, or are more extensively dispersed over the 
earth, in like manner orders are more widely diffused than 
genera. 

For example, all the orders of British plants are found in 
the vicinity of London, limited as before, except twelve ; and 
these twelve orders barely comprehend eighteen British spe- 
cies. Consequently the ordinal characters of all British vas- 
cular plants may be learned from such as ture found within a 
moderate walk of this city. Also the ordinal characters of 
all the Northern European species, and most of the Austrian 
and French may be acquired from the British orders. Four 
thousand of the Equinoctial plants of America may be re- 
ferred to their famiUes, in the same manner, and above 
thirty thousand species of known and described individuals. 
These facts prove that the study of a district Flora is of no 
mean importance, when we consider that by its aid we are 
enabled to decide on the genera of six times the number of 
species the said district supplies; and on the orders of 
thirty times the amount of its productions. And while the 
student is learning the characters and uses of the plants, in 
his own neighbourhood, he is acquiring the same knowledge 
of all such as agree in genera and ordinal characters, amount- 
ing to many thousands. 

The utility of Local Botanical investigation may also be 
estimated by its relation to national and general Floras, 
which could scarcely be produced without the assistance of 
resident Botanists or distnct Floras. 

If we take a retrospective view of the progress of this 
science since its revival or rather its commencement among 
us, in the times of Queen Elizabeth, we shall perceive that 
the value of Botanical localities was known at that early 
period. 

Gerarde, the author of the English Herbal, usually re- 



10 PBOCBSDINOS OF THE 

cords in his great work the places where he gathered the 
English plants^ which he has described therein. Johnson, 
the editor of a well known edition of the Herbal, published, 
about 1632, a catalogue of plants growing on Hampstead 
Heath, entitled ^^ Enumeratio Plantarun in Ericeto Hamp- 
stedeani locisque vicinis crescentium/^ This list contains 
somewhat fewer than one hundred species. But as the au- 
thor in his Preface professes to give such as he had not col- 
lected during his Iter Cantianum, and other Botanical pere- 
grinations, &c., three times as many more should probably 
be added ; and the Flora of Hampstead may, in those days, 
have been estimated at four hundred. Reckoning the Pha- 
nerogamous species, in the first edition of Ray^s Synopsis, at 
nine hundred, the Hampstead plants are to those as 4 : 9, 
being nearly one-half of the known English species. Black- 
stone^s "Fasciculus Plantarum Circa Harefield Nascentium,'* 
published in 1737> about one hundred years after the date of 
Johnson's Botanical publications, comprehends between five 
hundred and fifty and six hundred plants of the vascular 
species, collected within a circumference of twenty miles ; 
forming more than one-half of the British plants of the same 
sort known at that period. 

If Ray's Catalogue *^ Plantarum circa Cantabrigiam Nas- 
centium,'' published in 1660, be compared with the first edi- 
tion of his catalogue of English plants, published in 1670, 
we shall scarcely find one in four which is not noticed in the 
former work. From these facts we see how important local 
Floras are, as being the chief materials from which National 
Floras are compiled. The County Floras of Relhan, Sib- 
thorpe and Abbott, with the more local lists of plants formed 
by Warner, Jacob, and Forster, subsequently enabled the 
author of the Flora Britannica, and of the English Flora, to 
supply his country with one of the most valuable Floras in 
existence. 

Moreover, it is from local observers, who only have the 
opportunity of making a consecutive course of observations 
on plants, that we shall be able to approximate to the periods 
of their flowering, their times of arriving at maturity, and 
their seasons of decay and dissolution. By such a calendar 
as might be compiled from the budding, leafing, and aestiva- 
tion of common species, the agriculturist will more surely 
learn the proper time, for his important operations, than 
from Moore's Almanack. 

The difference in the commencement of Seasons, and their 



BOTANICAL 80GIBTT OF LONDON. 11 

duration in different latitudes may also be ascertained from 
the same source, with many other particulars respecting the 
geographical distribution of species, their abundance or their 
scarcity in different localities, their various appearances in 
different altitudes in open or in shady places, their preference 
for some soils, or their total indifference to this change. 
These, and many other interesting particulars, can only be 
communicated by resident Botanists. 

One of the desiderata which could easily be supplied by 
the Botanical Society of London, is a Flora of its environs. 
During a residence of several years in the Metropolitan 
Counties of Surrey, Kent, Middlesex, and Essex, the author 
of this communication was engaged in collecting for this 
purpose, and he is satisfied that the amount of vascular 
plants growing within twenty-five or thirty miles of London 
is underrated at one thousand ; and as there are no Alpine 
plants in this tract, and only a few maritime species, this 
may justly be considered the richest district in the kingdom, 
(for we have no local Flora containing an equal number) and 
it will repay the most accurate and extensive investigation. 

The number of Phanerogamous species detected, classified, 
and described by myself as growing on Hampstead Heath, 
and in the woods and fields adjoining, within less than two 
miles, was some years ago six huncbred and seventy. And 
AS it is probable that a few species were overlooked, seven 
hundred may be expected in that quarter. I have more re- 
cently been employed on the Croydon plants, and have al- 
ready entered about nine hundred species growing within 
twelve miles of the town ; and this list, I am assured, is far 
from complete ; if we add to these the plants growing on 
the banks of the river Thames, from Windsor Forest to the 
Isle of Sheppy, with the growth of the chalk hills about 
Maidstone and Rochester, the- Chiltem Hundreds, the 
Essex Marshes, Epping Forest, Leith Hill, and the Hog's 
Back between Dorking and Guildford, we need not be 
afraid of exaggeration in stating them at upwards of one thou- 
sand. From the proportion which the number of species in 
certain families bear to the whole vascular Flora, the plants 
may, in any particular district or country, be estimated — 
For example, in the average of six Floras, viz. : the Edin- 
burgh, the Devon, the Berwick, the Hampstead, the Scotch, 
and English Floras, the number of grasses is to the whole 
number of Phaenogamous plants, described in these Floras, as 
one-eleventh and a half; or there are eleven and a half times 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

as many vascular plants as grasses in these districts^ or ra- 
ther in an average of all the districts together. Also the 
Compositae bear nearly the same relative proportion to the 
rest^ as the grasses do^ or rather greater. In the above men- 
tioned Floras they are as one-eleventh, or a little more. 
Now the Compositae seen by me growing in the vicinity of 
London, together with a few seen by other judicious collec- 
tors, amount to ninety; which, at the proportion of one to 
eleven, would give nine hundred and ninety species ; and al- 
lowing for the excess of the other species, above eleven times 
the Compositae, about one thousand would be the result. 
Perhaps all that order has not as yet been observed. Several 
of the London species, in my Catalogues, are such as have 
rarely been seen in these parts, some of them were never 
before noticed as London plants, and a few are new to the 
Flora of this country. Were each gentleman, connected with 
this Society, to contribute his information on the subject in 
question, there is no doubt that the London Flora would far 
exceed in number of species, accuracy, and abundance of 
localities, every Local Flora of the country. By contributing 
to such a work, the members of the London Botanical So- 
ciety would both furnish the student with a most desirable 
hand-book, and also record their own knowledge of the 
science. In order to accomplish this undertaking with the 
utmost minuteness and dispatch, printed lists of species 
should be circulated among the Botanists of the metropolitan 
districts, or elsewhere. Such lists having columns for the in- 
sertion of the precise habitation of the species, the nature of 
the soil where it grows, the altitude of its locality, the time 
of flowering, and such like. 

The work might be so arranged, that in addition to the 
Botanical description of the genera and species found grow- 
ing within this limited tract, the remaining British genera 
and species might be added, with short notes of their specific 
differences. By this means the work would answer all the 
practical uses of a British Flora, with the greater facility of 
reference afforded by a district Flora. By curtailing the des- 
criptions, and using a small type, all the genera and species 
of the Continental Floras, not belonging to this country, but 
in the same latitude, might be inserted, along with as many 
of the exotic orders and genera as are without representa- 
tives in this coimtry ; at least such as are commonly culti- 
vated in oiu* gardens and greenhouses or used for medicinal 
preparations. A Flora constructed on these, or similar prih- 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 13 

ciples, would be one of the moi^t complete Botanical works 
ever published in this, or in any other country ; and would 
obviate the objection sometimes made, that such Floras as 
districts can supply, necessarily separate groups of plants 
which ought to be connected, and consequently mar the fair 
proportion and beauty of their systematic arrangement. Se- 
veral plants, properly exotics, have escaped frpm gardens and 
other places, and having found a soil and locality congenial 
to them, have become naturalized. These very properly are 
rejected in works intended to embrace British species only, 
and in consequence occasion much trouble to the student. 
Among these may be reckoned. Cannabis sativa, Solanum 
Lycopersicum, Geranium striatum, Malva Crispa, and per- 
haps many others, whose claims to a place in the British 
Flora are equal to those of iEnothera biennis. Datura 
Stramonium, and Echium Italicu^ Such acclimatized 
plants, though unfitted by their foreigi) origin, from ranking 
with British species, might have a space aUotted them in a 
work illustrative of British productions. 

By such an arrangement the advantage of easy reference 
would be secured, together with other signal improvements 
of great importance, to those students who wish to extend 
their researches beyond the narrow limits of their own na- 
tional Flora. 

I hope it will not be deemed intrusive to propose another 
matter to this Society, as a very desirable object, though 
more connected with the general subject than with any indi- 
vidual branch, as Local Botany. It appears that while phy- 
siological, systematic, and descriptive Botany, have been stu- 
died and illustrated with a zeal and success unexampled in 
former times, chemical Botany has not been so successfully 
prosecuted. 

Perhaps in the present state of chemical knowledge, it 
would be impossible to investigate the component parts of 
vegetable bodies, with the same successfiil and brilliant re- 
sults, as were obtained by submitting the alkalies and alka- 
line, and other earths, to the test of experiment. However, 
it might be worth the operator's while to make an attempt. 

It is certain that the chemical properties of vegetable sub- 
stances are not so well understood as the same properties of 
inanimate bodies. 

It is a common doctrine of Botany that individual species 
of the same natural order, contain nearly the same simple 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

substances^ or properties^ capable of producing the same 
effects. Therefore, it would be very desirable to know in 
what proportions the medical principle of Digitalis or of any 
other officinal plant, is diffused through all the individuals of 
the natural family Scrophularacese ; and also to what extent 
the wonderful property of Atropa Belladonna exists in other 
species of the order Solanacese, and such like. 

Although it IS probable that we shall not be able to learn 
the uses of each and all of the plants in the economy of cre- 
ation, any more than we can account for the reason of so 
many other existences ; yet, so far as their uses and ends 
can be detected, it is desirable that they should be so; 
whereby the query cui bono^ so often reproachfully flung at 
the naturalist, may be answered to the satisfaction of the 
querist, and the subject proved to be of direct and practical 
consequence to all classes of society. 

Botanists mi^ht justly be said to waste their lives in frivo- 
lous pursuits, if the sole object of their labours were to learn 
the names of plants, and arrange them systematically. But 
when we consider that man, and terrestrial animals, derive 
their sole support and nourishment from vegetation, it can- 
not be said that the subject is not of great importance. 

It was said that ^^ the man who makes one single blade of 
grass to grow, in addition to those akeady growing, is a be- 
nefactor to his country.'^ How much greater will be his 
claims on the gratitude of his age, and of posterity, who dis- 
covers and publishes the useful properties of thousands of 
plants, hitherto neglected, because unknown. The French, 
when deprived of their sugar-bearing possessions, in the 
East and West Indies, and unable to get a supply elsewhere, 
availed themselves of beet-root for this purpose ; and what 
was at that time the result of compulsion, has long from 
choice been a staple manufacture of that country. AU spe- 
cies of the gramineous tribe, contain, some more, some less 
of a saccharine juice. The stem of Zea-mays or Indian corn, 
appears to contain this, very abundantly, whether in a 
greater degree than beet-root might be worth investigating. 

It is probable that the medicinal qualities of thousands of 
plants are unknown, or are not sufficiently known to be 
available in Medical practice. 

It may be said that there is no necessity to learn the 
medicinal qualities of plants, as the practitioner can obtain 
from the proper source, a cheaper and better supply than 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 15 

could be procured by any individual ; and this is true in En- 
gland^ and especially in London. But may not the medical 
man be employed in other countries^ where such a supply 
cannot always be had, and where several of the plants from 
which his drugs are obtained do not grow. In such circum- 
stances it will surely be requisite to know from what similar 
productions the proper remedies may be procured. 

I have now laid before you some of the benefits derivable 
from a knowledge of local Botany, and which I shall briefly 
recapitulate. 

1st. That with the aid of our native plants, few indeed 
compared with the many thousands that beautify the earth 
and afford food to man and beast, a very correct knowledge 
of Botanical science may be acquired, and an extensive 
acquaintance formed with the habits, characters, and pro- 
perties of at least half the species in existence. 

2nd. That it is chiefly by the aid of local Botany, that 
national and other Floras can be accm*ately compiled. 

3rd. I have shewn what would be the results of an accu- 
rate and extensive botanical investigation of the Environs of 
London. 



NOVEMBER 29th. 

J. ![£• Gray, Esq., F.R.S., in the Chair. 

General Meeting. 

This being the day fixed upon at a former meeting for the 
Anniversary of the Society (being the Anniversary of the 
birth of the English Botanist, John Ray), it was proposed, 
seconded, and carried unanimously, that the Society take its 
foundation on this day. The Secretary read a draft of the 
laws, which were submitted to the Meeting, and confirmed, 
after which the ballot for the election of Officers took place, 
when the following gentlemen were duly elected. 

John Edward Gray, Esq., F.R.S., Preddeni. 

J. Reynolds, Esq., Treasurer. \ Daniel Cooper, Esq. Curattyr, 

W. M. Chatterley, Esq., Secretary. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 



Other members of the Council — 



Edward Charlesworth, Esq. 

F.G.S. 
George E. Dennes, Esq. 
Joseph Freeman, Esq. 
^neas Mac Intyre, LL.D., 

F.L.S. 
Charles Johnson, Esq. 



D.C.Macreight, M.D.,F.L.S. 
Henry A. Meeson, Esq. 
James Mitchell, LL.D., 

F.G.S. 
T. B. Salter, M.D. 
C. E. Sowerby, Esq. A.L.S. 
W. H. White, Esq. 



The President then appointed the two following gentlemen 
as Vice Presidents. 

D.C.Macreight, M.D .,F.L.S. | Charles Johnson, Esq. 

After which the Chairman addressed the meeting, congratu- 
lating them upon the generally flourishing condition of Botani- 
cal Science especially in this country, and enumerated the ad- 
vantages to be derived from a general study of Botany, and 
those likely to proceed from the establishment of this Society. 



DECEMBER 1st. 

J. E. Gray, Esq. F.R.S., President in the Chair. 

A Paper was read by Dr. iEneas Mac Intyre, F.L.S, en- 
titled "-4 Notice of Plants growing spontaneously on and 
about Warley Common^ in Essex !^ 

The investigation is restricted to a radius of less than two 
miles from the south eastern angle of the Common. But 
this area exhibits a great diversity of soil, and a consequent 
variety of vegetation. 

The Common itself is an elevated and gravelly plain, with 
two or three ponds on its surface, and a branching bog near 
its northern edge. These ponds and boggy hollows, as well 
as the shady lanes and watery ditches, towards Brook Street 
and Brentwood, teem with interesting botanical specimens. 
The three diversities which have just been mentioned, 
namely, the dry part of the Common, the watery parts 
thereof, and the adjoining lanes, nourishing many plants 
peculiar to themselves, might be designated respectively, and 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 1? 

for the sake of brevity, by the letters a, by c. The subsoil in 
all is sandy or gravelly ; the ponds and the bog containing 
more or less of decayed vegetable matter, and many of 
the lanes immixing the gravel with clay or covering it 
with a rich mould. 

The dry gravelly fields^ moreover, which bound the com- 
mon on the east, as well as the clayey or loamy lands, and 
the soft and often watery meadows lying further towards the 
east and the south, are particularly interesting to the agri- 
cultural Botanist. The letters d and e might distinguish the 
herbage peculiar to sand or gravel, from that which delights 
in a stiflF or moist clayey soil. 

The woods and groves, however, which surround the 
Common on every side, except the northern, are perhaps the 
most interesting parts of this vicinity ; the trees and shrubs 
shading the more feeble plants, partly on a dry surface, 
whether gravelly or clayey, partly amidst swampy bogs. 
These diversities might be marked by the letters / and ff. 
But the wood that lies on the eastern side, contains the 
greatest and the most interesting variety of native produc- 
tions. 

The number of Genera of which I have seen specimens in 
the several stations described above, exceeds three hundred 
and forty, including ten Genera of ferns. Now, all the 
British Genera of the same kind, that is, of Phsenogaraous 
plants and ferns, do not exceed four hundred and eighty. 
We have species, therefore, of nearly two thirds of this latter 
number, and on a superficies of less than two miles from its 
centre. The remaining genera belong, for the most part, to 
the sea-side, to chalky ground, or to high mountains. A few 
of the chalk-plants, indeed, are found in this locality, because 
a few spots are naturally somewhat marly, and the fields are 
often furnished with chalk or with lime, from Grays and 
Sifibrd, or from Purfleet. 

A deficiency will be observed in the number of Species, as 
compared with the number of Genera. This arises, in part, 
from the entire omission of the multitudinous species of 
Carex and of Salix, in part, from my having neglected to 
register a good many species that I had cursorily noticed, 
and in part, I fully believe, from a real deficiency of about 
one hundred species belonging to the genera comprised in 
this list. (A list of the genera and species here followed, of 
which the following is the summary : — ) 

c 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

1. Filices . . Genera . 10 Species 23 



2. Monocotyledons s j .,. 



Grasses . 31 70 

Liliaceae^ &c. 34 66 



65 136 

3, Dicotyledons . . 265 542 



Total 340 Genera 701 Species 

In the above table the species of Salix and Carex^ are not 
estimated. 

Here, the proportion of Monocotyledons to Dicotyledons 
is about one to four ; the genera and species in each division 
retaining very nearly an equal proportion to each other, viz. 
as one to two. 

I purpose, in my subsequent communication, to give a 
succint general view of each of the three divisions already 
mentioned; noticing the abundance or scarcity, the luxuriance 
or the deficiencies of the more interesting groups, with such 
other observations as the diversity of the subject may suggest, 
as there is a very great variety of country included in this limit. 



General Observations. 

I. Ferns. 

Neither on the common itself, nor about the watery spots 
by which it is sparingly studded, is there any considerable 
variety of ferns. The brakes, however, are in immense 
abundance on the former ; and Blechnum boreale, with its 
elegant fronds, borders several of the watery places. But 
the neighbouring lanes and hedges exhibit these curious 
plants in great variety and in much profusion. Passing by 
Polypodium, Scolopendvium, and several of the more common 
species of Aspidium — we find in great abundance the 

Aspidium Filix foemina, 

dilatatum, 

angulare, 

lobatum : 

Asplenium Trichomanes, sparingly, 

Adiantum nigrum, plentifully. 

The boggy wood, however, that is still permitted to flourish 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 19 

on the western side of the common, from which it is sepa- 
rated only by a few sandy fields, feeds and shelters the most 
interesting fern in these parts, and amidst a luxuriant profu- 
sion of the ferns already mentioned, as well as of Equisetum 
sylvestre and fluviatile, whose elegant fronds, "mimick 
dwarf Pine trees/* The fern to which I am alluding is 
Osmunda regahs, whose large and beautiful fronds — the 
nearest British approach to the palms of the south — rise in 
thousands in the interior of this otherwise uninteresting wood. 
I have not noticed that these ferns are much used in the 
neighbourhood for economical purposes. But it is well 
known, that most of them possess other useful properties 
besides that of preparing the soil for more perfect plants, a 
property which is common to them with the mosses and 
many other Cryptogamous groups. Several more northerly 
districts, however, exhibit these properties, and in many 
cases, not without an adequate reward. 



II. MoNOCOTYLEDONOUs (or Endogeuotis) Plants. 

In this division, the grasses are the most numerous, as 
well as the more useful species ; and form, in all temperate 
climates particularly, the principal clothing of cultivated 
districts. 

The common, with its bogs and neighbouring woods, as 
well as the sandy and loamy fields which surround it, furnish 
a vast variety of British grasses. Indeed, there are not many 
indigenous species, fond of similar localities, that may not be 
detected here. 

In the meadows, the more favoured sorts are, Lolium 
perenne, Cynosurus cristatus, Dactylis glomerata, when 
kept well down by sheep, with some species of Agrostis, Poa, 
Festuca, and Bromus. Holcus mollis, and Alopecurus pra- 
tensis, although very common, are not much prized. And 
Hordeum pratense indicates a cold clayey soil, not easily 
fertilised. 

In com fields, the most troublesome grasses are Lolium 
temulentum, Alopecurus agrestis or black grass, and 
Triticum repens, or twitch, sometimes called couch grass. 
Clayey soils are particularly obnoxious to these weeds, from 
which no ordinary pains will free them. 

The Orchideae, in vast abundance, and in great variety of 

c 2 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

colours, cover the meadows in May ; and Neottia spiralis is, 
in several of them, equally plentiful in September. Listera 
ovata is in great profusion, and Epipactis latifolia very spa- 
ringly found in the woods. 

Of the other plants that belong to this division, Convallaria 
majalis, Scilla nutans, and Allium ursinum, occupy extensive 
plots, and almost exclusively; whilst Fritillaria Meleagris and 
Omithogalum umbellatum are found only occasionally in 
shady groves or copses. 

I have not mentioned the multitudinous specimens of 
Carex, Scirpus, and Eleocharis, of Callitriche, Alisma, and 
Sparganium, or of Typha, Juncus, and Luciola, which we 
meet at every step. But the Cotton grass which grows in the 
bog on the common, may interest those who have not had an 
opportunity of seeing this plant in some other situation. 

Amongst the Endogenous genera here noticed, economical 
use is almost entirely confined to the Grasses and Rushes ; 
yet it is not likely that the remaining splendid vegetation is 
designed for ornament alone, although that object is most 
extensively pursued in the whole material creation. 



III. DicoTyLEDONOus (or Exogenotis) Plants. 

As the Cryptogamous division of the vegetable kingdom 
prevails in the more northern climes, and the Monocotyledo- 
nous in the more southern regions, the Dicotyledonous seem 
naturally to prevail in temperate climates; for even the 
grasses of the climate are, in a great degree, the result of 
husbandry. 

Some of the plants now under consideration, indeed, may 
often be observed in flower during the most torpid part of 
the winter. And, in the earliest months of the year, long 
before the sun has returned to our hemisphere, the relaxed 
catkins of the hazel, and the bursting flower-buds of the 
elm along every hedge-row, the banks and walls glittering 
with Draba verna, and the meadows covered with the earlier 
Veronicas, give us sufficient proof that our summer herbage 
had not been dead, but asleep. The sheltering woods and 
hedges, too, soon induce their timid clients to trust their soft 
petals, for a few hours, to the open air. 

April, however, witnesses in this country, the chief struggle 
between the departing and the coming season. And the 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 21 

progress of vegetation is rapid or slow, in proportion to the 
prevalence of the latter or the former. 

But, '^ as soon as the golden sun has completely vanquished 
the winter, and opened up the sky with the light of summer/' 
Flora then leads out her whole family, rejoicing in their new 
health and vigour, and vying with each other, as it were, in 
the beauty and the variety of their dresses. 

During several months of the summer, indeed, upwards of 
two hundred species may be gathered in flower, about 
Warley Common, in the space of one day. 

Amongst the most abundant ornamental flowers on the 
common, besides the beautiful Ulex, are, patches of Veronica 
officinalis. Erica Tetralix, Trifolium subterraneum, Anagallis 
tenella and cserulea, Omithopus perpusillus, Drosera rotun- 
difolia, Menyanthes trifoliata, and Polygala in all its varied 
beauties. 

Doronicum plantagineum, Borago orientalis, and Linaria 
bipartita, have not, I believe, been elsewhere in England 
noticed growing apparently wild, certainly in this situation 
spontaneously. 

At the conclusion of the paper. Dr. M. remarked, that he 
had collected, in conjunction with a friend, 205 species in the 
neighbourhood of Warley, in one day's excursion. 



DECEMBER 15th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Dr. Mac Intyre communicated some further remarks relative 
to the spontaneous vegetation of the vicinity of Warley, Essex, 
after which Mr. Dennes read the results of his excursions in 
the neighbourhood of Deal and Walmer, in which he princi- 
pally confirmed the stations for the rarer species given in 
Mr. Watson^s New Botanist's Guide. The following are the 
principal localities : — 

Lathyrtbs pisiformis . Stony Beach between Walmer and 

Kingsdown, August, not common. 

SUene conica . . . Heath near Sandown Castle, very 

scarce, and not in flower in August. 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF: THE 

Medtcago minima ? . Heath near Sandown Castle ; very 

scarce in August. 
GlavxAum luteum . Very common about Deal and Wal- 

mer; August and September.* 
Bunias cakile . . . One Specimen on the beach, between 

Deal and Walmer, in August. 
lAnum angustifolium. Cliffs at Walmer, near the Castle, 

common in August. 
Criihmum maritimum. Dover Cliffs, and Cliffs at Kingsdown, 

scarce in August and September. 
Statice spathulata . Dover Cliffs, and Cliffs at Kingsdown, 

common in August. 
Salicomia herbacea . Heath near Sandown Castle, common. 
Phalaris canariensis. One Specimen near Deal Castle, in 

August. 



JANUARY 5th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Mr. Daniel Cooper read a Paper " On the distribution of 
plants in Battersea Fields, Surrey , accompanied tvith a map 
or plan exhibiting^ on the scale of ttvo feet to the mile, the 
particular localities of the rarer species" The following is 
an extract : — 

Battersea Fields is situated at a distance of about three 
miles from the principal bridges of the metropolis, in the pa-» 
rish of Battersea, county of Surrey. 

This locality has been for years past famous for the pro- 
fuse supply of specimens it has yielded to the Botanist, to 
the Entomologist, and to the Conchologist. To the Botanist 
in particular, Battersea Fields offers an extensive field for re- 
search, and there is but little doubt that in years past, if we 
may credit such authorities as Martyn, Curtis, Merrett, and 
others, that it was a richer locality than it is even at the pre- 
sent time ; it has also been for some time the general resort 
of simplers or herb-gatherers, for the supply of the Londoa 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 23 

market^ on account of the great profiision of certain herbs or 
simples which abound there ; hence arose the old saying, 
" Cfo to Batter sea to be cut for the simples.^' 

This iQcality extends for about a mile and a half in length, 
from Nine Elms to Battersea village, and varying from half a 
mile to a mile in breadth, extending from the river Thames 
towards the Wandsworth Road ; on account of its occupying 
so great an extent, it necessarily offers some slight variation, 
such as cultivated fields, meadows, pastures, &c. Being for 
the most part situated below the level of high water mark, 
the meadows and pastures are more or less watered, although 
the tide is kept out by means of a high embankment on the 
border of the river. Interspersed between the meadows and 
pastures, are small ditches, or streamlets, which, from their 
being often overflowed by the draining from the fields, keep 
the ground more or less supplied with moisture. It is more 
particularly in these ditches and streamlets that the Bota- 
nist, Entomologist, and Conchologist, delight to seek the 
productions of nature ; which being mostly formed of stag- 
nant water, abound with interesting specimens to the natu- 
ralist ; moreover, since it has been ascertained that particular 
tribes feed, and are found attached to particular plants, or 
tribes of plants, it follows that from this locality which offers 
more than one-half of the natural orders, rather less than one- 
half of the genera, and more than one-fourth of the species, 
of flowering plants, indigenous to Britain, many insects will 
likewise be found. 

The substratum is a stiff clay, except in those places where 
for cultivation, chalk, and other soils, have been introduced, 
in order to render the land fit for the produce of such crops 
as the farmer may consider necessary. 

Battersea Fields may be conveniently divided into six dis- 
tinct and nearly equal parts ; the first division of which, is 
the meadows and pastures ; the second, the cultivated fields ; 
the third, the osier grounds ; the fourth, Battersea Common ; 
the fifth, the ponds and ditches, &c. ; and lastly, the market 
gardens, together with a portion of Wandsworth Common, in 
the parish of Battersea. 

(Here followed a brief notice of each particular district, 
with a list of some of the rarer species found in them.) 

What will become at length of this rich locality ? of this 
*^ The wild Botanic garden ofLondon^^ as it may be termed ; 
the place where most of our ancestors and ourselves have so 



24 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

often rambled, with profit and delight, M^hen raiboads ex- 
tend into this, the metropolitan Botanist's favourite locality, 
overturning and obliterating some of nature's choicest pro- 
ductions? Our only alternative in this matter, will be to 
work together in order to arrive at the greatest accuracy, and 
produce a plan or plans of the nature here exhibited ; that at a 
future period when railroads, and such like public under- 
takings, have demolished our richest locality in the imme- 
diate neighbourhood of this metropolis, we shall have at 
least a plan to show our descendants that a place existed 
which abounded in so profuse a supply of plants at a stone's 
throw from London ; with this view it was, that I under- 
took the execution of the map, or plan, and hope that this 
rough sketch, as an example, will be followed up by the 
members ; so that, in the course of a short period, we may 
have in our possession, plans exhibiting the distribution of 
plants through at least England, Wales, and Scotland, as 
well as those of the continent, and, finally, in whatsoever di- 
rection our working members may be called.* 

Annexed will be found the summary of the whole of the 
flowering plants, which are, and have been, known to grow 
there, under their respective Natural Groups. Of the one 
hundred and four natural orders of British flowering plants, 
mentioned in Dr. Lindley's First Edition of his Synopsis of 
British Flora, sixty are found in this locality. Of the five 
hundred and three genera of British flowering plants, two 
hundred and fourteen are here distributed; and, lastly, 
out of the one thousand five hundred estimated species 
of British flowering plants, four hundred and six are 
here found dispersed ; thus in this piece of ground, which I 
believe measures one mile and a half in length, and one 
mile in breadth, we have more than one-half of the British 
natural orders, as sixty to one hundred and four, not quite 
half of the genera, in the ratio of two hundred and fourteen 
to five hundred and three, and rather better than one-fourth of 
the species in the ratio of four hundred and six to one thou- 
sand five hundred ; the localities of which were published 
in the Flora Metropolitana, 1836. 



* Since the above paper was read, Mr. M. H. Cowell has produced a map 
illustrating the Flora of Faversham, Kent, and Miss C. Perry has also forwarded 
a map exhibiting the distribution of plants in the neighlx)urhood of Haslemere, 
Surrey, in which the localities of the plants are marked off. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 25 

ThefoUowmg Table will show the number in each tribe : — 
T T^ r37 DichlamydesB 

I. DiCOTTLBDONS, ) c \/r v,^ J -. 

A' A ^ " MonochlamydeBB 

L 2 Acblamydese 
II. Monocotyledons, f 13 Petaloidese 
15 orders \ 2 GlumaceaB 



Genera. 


Species. 


158 


272 


m 11 


39 


2 


7 


19 


31 


24 


57 


Total 214 


406 



Mr. Thomas Hancock then communicated some Notes on 
^^ Plants found near Bristol, in September 1836.'* He thus 
commences : — 

In the following remarks^ I intend to mention merely a few 
of the more interesting plants which I met with during an 
excursion with several gentlemen of the British Association, 
as far as Penpool and Blaize Castle, (about eight or ten 
miles North West of Bristol) in the early part of September 
last, commencing with 

Erodium : both cicutarium and moschatum, we found in 
the loamy earth between the crevices of the rocks at Penpool. 

Polygala vulgaris. Pretty common about the fields and 
hedges. 

Lamium maculatum, A rare plant in both Gloucestershire 
and Somersetshire, to be found in only one locality near 
Bristol. Was this originally a native of Britain, or intro- 
duced from the Continent? In Turton's Edition of Linnseus, 
it is described as exclusively an inhabitant of Italy and Ger- 
many. The same author adds, that the leaves have a longi- 
tudinal white patch; I have seen several specimens, but 
never noticed this. 

Galeopsis ladanum. Very common. 

Myosurus minimus. Near Penpool and Blaize Castle, in 
sandy fields. 

Oxalis: both acetosella and corniculata, are met with 
here, among the hedges and moist places, near com fields. 

Galium. The following species were met with : saxatile, 
Aparine, MoUugo, palustre, spurium and verum. 

Ranunculus : acris, aquatilis, and bulbosus, are common ; 
the genus is very poisonous. 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

Convallaria multiflora. This we found in excellent state 
of flowering, although so late in the year as September. 

Mercurialis perennis, A solitary specimen. The extraor- 
dinary and beautiful powder with which this plant is be- 
sprinkled, although stated by some to be merely saponaceous 
mealy excrescences, I should rather consider as utricular 
glands. 

Plantago. Nearly all the indigenous species, very com- 
mon ; P. maritima, on a wet heath, near Penpool. 

Atriplex angustifolia, 

Cistus Helianthemum, and guttatus, A few specimens. 
One specimen of C. marifolius was found on Penpool rocks, 
by Mr. Rootsey. This genus, I find, is omitted in the cata- 
logue of the British Flora, published by the Botanical Society 
of Edinburgh. 

Polygonum. The plants of this geniis are abundant in 
every direction round Bristol. P. Convolvulus rather rare. 
Found P. aviculare in only one spot, where it grew abun- 
dantly. I have been informed by my friend, Mr. Rootsey, 
that, at certain times of the year, this plant is frequented by 
vast numbers of birds, who come to feed upon its seeds. 

Limosella aquatica. In pond, near Blaize Castle. 

Bumulus lupulits. Abundant in the hedges. 

Ilex aquifolium. The hedges of a lane were lined all along 
with this plant. 

Erica. This beautiful genus is here displayed in profu- 
sion and luxuriance ; E. vagans, cinerea, Tetralix, abound on 
the heaths. 

Symphytum officinale. In flower. In all the descriptions 
of this plant, which I have read, I have never seen it noticed 
that its root is prae morse or truncate ; which appearance was 
predominant in two specimens I saw in Somersetshire. 

Hypericum : perforatum and quadrangulum. Pretty 
common. 

Clematis vitalba and Callitriche verna. 

Iris pseud-acorus. Very common in clayey soils about 
Bristol. 

Allium oleraceum. The seeds of this plant are employed 
by the country people of Somersetshire and Gloucestershire, 
in making soup. 

Chlora perfoliata. In flower, on calcareous soil. 

Colchicum autumnale. A rare plant in this part of the 
country, in fine state of flowering. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 2? 

Carex sylvatica, pauciflora, and muricata. By the side of 
a heath, near a brook. Respecting this genus I may remark^ 
that no wonder it contains such a number of species, when 
both monoecious and dioecious plants are retained in it, and 
yet it is placed in the Class Monoecia. 

Eupatorium cannabinum. Rather rare. 

Chenopodium, Several species on the sea-shore at PenpooL 

Trifolmn. A very common genus here. Of T. ochroleu-^ 
cum, found only one solitary, specimen. 

Mentha. Very abundant along the sides of the rivers, 
hedges, &c. 

Pedicularis palustris. On some gravelly hillocks, near 
Blaize Castle. 

Anagallis arvensis.. A rare plant in this part of the coun- 
try, in moist meadows and corn fields. 

Statice. Armeria and Umonium. Near the sea-shore at 
Penpool. 

Mahacem. The plants of this tribe are very scarce in this 
part of Gloucestershire. Malva sylvestris, and M. Rotundi- 
folia we met with in only two or three places. Althaea offi- 
cinalis is pretty plentiful near Penpool. 

Cardamine pratensis. A few specimens. 

Clinopodium vulgare : Antirrhinum majus, with Linaria 
spuria and Elatine. 

T^lia europtea. Two or three specimens among the woods. 

lAffustrum vulgare. 

Tamils communis. An uncommon plant here. But on the 
South West coast of Somersetshire, near Watchet, on the 
Bristol Channel, it lines almost every hedge for miles 
around. It is there esteemed a great remedy for chilblains, 
and is termed by the natives Road-berry, from the circum- 
stance of its always growing on the side of the hedge, facing 
the road. 

Glaudum luteum. A few specimens on a muddy heath, 
near Penpool. 

Galanthus nivalis. A single specimen. 

Juniperis communis. Rather common in the hedges. 

Digitalis purpurea. Very abundant in all clayey and gra- 
velly soils here. 

Viola. Several species. 

CEnanthe crocata. Plentiful. 

Pceonia officinalis. This was found by Mr. Rootsey, grow- 
ing wild in a thicket of bushes, near Blaize Castle, which 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

would go to disprove the statement that it was introduced 
into this country. There were two or three specimens^ but 
not in flower. 

That beautiful tribe of plants^ the Fems^ are here dis- 
played in profusion. Specimens of almost every indigenous 
genus may be collected in one day^s exctirsion^ from Bristol 
to Blaize Castle. Those most common or abundant, how- 
ever, are the Genera Asplenium, Aspidium^ Lycopodium, 
Equisetum, and Scolopendrium. 



JANUARY 19th. 

W. H. White in the Chair. 

A continuation of Dr. Mac Intyre's Paper, on the Flora of 
Warley, Essex, was read, comprising the concluding part, 
as inserted at page 18. 



FEBRUARY 2nd. 

J. E. Oray, Esq. F.R.S., President, in the Chair» 

Mr. J. Freeman read a Memoir entitled, ^^ Hints on the 
Importance and Practicability of adopting a more Systematic 
Method in describing and unranging the Species of Plants" 

The author proposes to arrange the Species of British 
Plants in Tables, and endeavours to show the many advan- 
tages it will afford to the young student in the rapid determi- 
nation of the species. 

The following is an abstract of the paper : — 

Genus — Thalictrum. 
Analysis of the Species. 

Stem perfectly simple, with a simple terminal 

cluster ..... Alpinum 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 29 

Leaves doubly pinnate 

Stem zig-zag .... Minus 
Stem erect, furrowed . . . Flavum 

Leaves triply pinnate 

Leaflets glaucous beneath • • Majus 

In the genus Anemone^ there are four British species, and 
about thirty-four characters are usually employed for their 
description ; but it is conceived, that about nine or ten only, 
are absolutely necessary for the purpose, and may thus be 
arranged in a tabular form :— 

Anemone. 

Analysis of the Species. 

Petals 5, elliptical . . . Ranunculoides 

Petals 6, 

Involucrum in deep linear segments 

Fruit with feathery tails . Pulsatilla 

Involucrum of three ternate lobed leaves 

Fruit without feathery tails . Nemorosa 

Petals numerous and lanceolate . Apennina 

The species of the genus Ranunculus, are separated into 
two divisions only. The first division consisting of those 
which have their leaves simple, and the second of those 
having lobed or cut leaves: but we might subdivide the 
latter division which consists of twelve species, into four 
secondary divisions; the first, including those having the 
stem erect ; the second, those with a prostrate stem ; the 
third, those having a creeping stem ; and the fourth division 
consisting of those which have a floating stem. And whereas 
about one hundred and twelve characters, including repeti- 
tions, are usually employed in the description of the British 
species of Ranunculus, considerably less than half that num- 
ber would suffice. 

The plan of classification that has been proposed, is not 
however, meant to supersede, but to accompany a more de- 
tailed description of species, which might be given, as has 
been already remarked, beneath the analytical table ; for even 
the minutest particular relating to the structure or economy 
of plants, is of too much importance to be overlooked ; but 
at the same time it is highly desirable that the facts that have 
been astertained, should not be heaped together in confusion, 
presenting to the mind nothing but a ^rudis indigestaque 



30 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

moles/ which by its unsightly appearance repels inquiry^ and 
discourages. investigation; but it is of the utmost importance 
that these facts should be Arranged and classified^ in such 
order, as will best illustrate their connection and mutual 
relation; 



Mr. G. E. Dennes communicated the result of his re- 
searches in the neighbourhood of Deal, Walmer, Dover, and 
Sandwich, Kent, in August and September 1836; and 
stated that he had discovered in the vicinity of Deal and 
Walmer, during his short stay, eighty-four genera, including 
one hundred and twenty species^ and considers that the 
number might be much increased at other seasons. 



FEBRUARY 16th. 

J. E, Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Mr. W. A. Lewis communicated a Paper on the Natural 
Order Ranunculacete^ in which he alluded principally to the 
opinions of M. DecandoUe. 



MARCH 2nd. 

Dr. Macrbight, V. P., F.L.S., in the Chair. 

Mr. H. A. Meeson read a Paper on the Classification of 
plants, and enumerated the advantages to be derived from 
studying vegetables according to the Natural system, point- 
ing out its superiority over the Linnsean Artificial arrange- 
ment ; but, at the same time, acknowledging with deference 
that the system of that great naturalist was the means of res- 
cuing the science from oblivion, and concluded by stating 
that Linnaeus himself was engaged, even to his death, in 
forming a Natural Arrangement of Plants, seeing that the 
laws of his former system were liable to great variation. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 31 

MARCH 16th. 

¦ 

J. E. Gray, Esq.^ F.R.S.^ President in the Chair. 

Mr. John Reynolds made some remarks on the Chinese 
plants described in Kirscher's History of China. The first 
alluded to was the China Rose, which is stated to have the 
peculiar property of changing colour twice a-day, from 
purple to white^ from the loss of some peculiar ammoniacal 
principle. 

The second mentioned was a plant analogous to Sago^ 
possessing a farinaceous pulp, extensively employed as an 
article of food in those regions, and known to the natives by 
the name of Quanff lang, A third, Clavaria^ was noticed, 
and which was stated to grow only on insects. 

Several others possessing singular and peculiar properties, 
as described by Kirscher, were described. 

Mr. R. Leylands of Halifax, Yorkshire, forwarded to the 
Society specimens of a Moss, new to Britain, called Cincli- 
dium stygium discovered on a moor near Maltham Tarn, in 
Yorkshire, by Mr. John No well, of Halifax, who had paid 
particular attention to the lower tribes of plants. The Pre- 
sident then instanced several examples in which specimens 
were often forwarded to the British Museum to be named, 
collected by persons in humble life in various parts of this 
country. 



APRIL 6th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Mr. W. M. Chatterley read a translation of M. Alphonse 
DecandoUe's dissertation on the Geographical distribution of 
the plants used as food, confining himself more particularly 
to the theoretical and statistical portion of the subject. The 
paper was extracted from the fifth number of " La Biblio- 
theque Universelle de Geneve,'^ for April and May, 1836.* 

Dr. Bossey exhibited a specimen of PotentUla mpina found 
by him near Woolwich, Kent. 

?The translation appeared in the Magazine of Popular Science, Vol. 4, 1837. 



32 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 



APRIL 20th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Mr. Chatterley read a continuation of his Paper, translated 
from the French of M. A. Decandolle, on the geographical 
distribution of plants, used as food. This portion of the 
paper contained several facts connected with the dispersion, 
according to the climate and temperature, of the Gramineae, 
and the several uses to which they are applied by the people 
of different nations. 

The President afterwards communicated to the Society, the 
recent discoveries of a French Botanist, read before the Aca- 
demy of Sciences at Paris, in March last in the leaves of 
Kylanium. From each of the spiculae, a number of membra- 
neous cylinders were found to be constantly projecting, which 
afterwards became contracted ; and by the aid of a powerful 
glass, this may be seen in specimens preserved for forty years. 
The President stated that he had since performed the experi- 
ment with success. 



Mr. T. Hancock then read some notes on ^^ Lamium Macu- 
latum^^ of which the following is an extract : — 

Having seen many specimens of this plant, entirely des- 
titute of the large white spots, so particularly insisted on by 
authors as its most important specific mark of distinction, — 
as well as from having seen several with white flowers, and 
approaching so closely, nay, almost running into, Lamium 
albumy as to be hardly distinguishable from it, — I have been 
induced to pay some little attention to the subject, and the 
results are contained in the following remarks. 

This plant, Lamium maculatum, is exceedingly rare in 
both Somersetshire and Gloucestershire. My friend, Mr. 
Thwaites, last year forwarded me a specimen of the white 
variety, which he obtained at Retland Court, six or seven miles 
from Bristol, and which, he said, was the only habitat for it 
near that city, with which he was acquainted. I have since 
seen other specimens of the white flower variety, closely 
approaching in habit and general appearance to L. album, 
but having fewer whorls; and in none have I found the 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 33 

longitudinal white patch on the leaves^ mentioned by most 
authors as the chief characteristic of the species. 

Dr. Hooker however, says, that the flowers are constantly 
purple^ and adds, on the testimony of Sir James Smith, that 
the large white spot on the leaves appears principally in the 
winter and early in spring ; but he continues, " they are not 
represented so in the English Botany, and the plant is widely 
different from what is cultivated as L. maculatum in our 
gardens, which has the leaves vastly smaller, with a large 
white spot on all of them, and is well figured as the true 
maculatum, in Reichenbach^s Ichonographia.'* — British Flora. 

Now, as far as my limited experience goes, I should con- 
sider that Sir James Smith was quite correct in his descrip- 
tion^ of the plant as the true maculatum; and that the 
specimen from which his figure was taken, was at the time 
destitute of the white patches on the leaves. Further, since 
we find the leaves of L, purpureum to be invariably smaller 
than those of either maculatum or album; and since we know 
that changes in the colours of leaves, as well as of flowers, 
take place from different soils and modes of culture, I am 
induced to believe, that the garden-plant figured by Reichen- 
bach as^ the true maculatum, and adopted by Dr. Hooker 
as such, is no other than purpureum. Or, since this would 
be doubting the accuracy of those illustrious Botanists, it is 
on the other hand highly probable, that Reichenbach and 
Hooker's specimens might have been monstrous vegetables, 
uniting certain qualities of the two in one ; for we know 
that such structural changes in plants do take place, and 
tend more to mislead, than if we take nature herself for our 
guide. 

With regard to the whorls — their number cannot alone be 
reasonably regarded as a specific mark of distinction ; and 
in this consists the chief difference between maculatum and 
album. Dr. Lindley disregards these, the whorls, and unites 
the two as varieties ; making purpureum a separate species, 
and giving to them the specific name of vulgatum. He 
however makes no mention of the leaves being inciso-serrate, 
while this is particularly remarkable in both plants. 

I would direct attention, therefore, to the following facts, 
which strongly support the assumption, that album and ma- 
culatam^ are but varieties of one and the same species. The 
leaves, in both, are invariably serrate, or inciso-serrate; in 
maculatum^ they grow to as large a size as in alburn^ have the 
same appearance, and are both subject to the occasional or 

D 



.34 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

periodical white spots. In general appearance, the two 
plants are both rugose, sometimes villous ; and the flowers 
of maculatum are in colour either white or purple. The only 
point of diflerence then, that I can perceive, is in the number 
of flowers borne on the whorls ; which, in album is reported 
to be twenty, and in maculatum ten ; and this, I would ven- 
ture to suggest, is no more entitled to the honour of the term 
specific distinction^ than variations in colour. 

With regard to L. purpureum : — I have not had sufficient 
experience wdth this species to enable me to decide on its 
exact aflSnities with those of which we have been treating ; 
but, from Hooker^s and Reichenbach^s observations, I should 
consider it equally subject to acquire the white patches on 
the leaves ; I think myself justified in stating, that if careful 
attention be paid to the three species, the marks of distinc- 
tion between purpureum and vulgatum (or album and macu- 
latum combined) will be found to be but trifling indeed. It 
would also serve to give us some just notions of the various 
gradations which plants undergo, there being doubtless in 
existence specimens intermediate between the species of 
many genera. And as we proceed in our investigations, we 
shall find that no subject in nature is isolated, but that each 
and all form a regular series of connecting existences ; our 
distinctions of species being in many instances imaginary, 
and mistaken for realities, because we cannot observe the 
whole series, but only a link here and there. 



Mr. Reynolds continued his remarks on the Plants de- 
scribed in " Kirscher^s China illustrata.'^ 



MAY 4th. 
Mr. White in the Chair. 

Mr. Reynolds concluded his observations on the Plants 
of China. A paper was read from Mr. Arthur Wallis, en- 
titled, " A Catalogue of some of the rarer Plants^ growing in 
the vicinity of Chehnsfordy Essex !^ 

Although the Flora of this part of Essex presents no very 
striking peculiarities, yet, nevertheless, several rare and in- 
teresting species are to be found, ornamenting the hedges 
and fields, with the multitudinous variety of colour, form. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 35 

and size, which they present. The town of Chelmsford is 
situated in the centre of a flat but highly cultivated district, 
and but little interspersed with woods and heaths, which lat- 
ter are annually being decreased in size and number, by the 
levelling hand of human industry. From this scarcity, of 
what may be called oases to the lover of nature, though de- 
serts to the agriculturists, it is, that the Essex Flora partakes 
more of an agrarian character than any other, there being so 
few stations suited for the growth of alpine plants. 

There are many plants named in the following catalogue, 
which cannot be said to be rare^ although but sparingly dis- 
tributed in the particular locality of Chelmsford. But care 
has been taken that mention should be made of such as may 
serve to elucidate the harmony of nature in the geognq)hical 
distribution of the vegetable kingdom. 

The genus Veronica may be first mentioned, of which two 
of the less common species have been found near Chelmsford. 

Veronica cutellata^ which I formerly gathered in one spot 
on the banks of the Chelmer has been for the last two years 
extinct there. 

V. moniana, grows plentifully, close by the original station, 
for the last mentioned species ; flowers of a much paler blue, 
than those of V. Chamaedrys. 

Iris fcetidissima, A small copse, at Writtle, near Chelms- 
ford ; but very sparingly. 

Alopecurus fulvus. Widford, on Chelmer banks. Chelms- 
ford is very barren of the rarer of the British grasses ; but the 
pastures are remarkable for their richness and luxuriance. I 
have only thought this, and the following sufficiently uncom- 
mon to be mentioned here. 

Bromtis secalirms. Sandon, near Chelmsford. 

Lolium temulentum. Danbury ; there seems but little dif- 
ference between this noxious species and L. Arvense. 

Asperula odorata. Wood at Great Leighs. 

Myosotis collina. Hedge-banks at Springfield, near Chelms- 
ford; a delicate little species^ flowering quite early in the 
spring. 

Lysimachia vulgaris. Springfield ; at the same place are 
also found L. Nemorum and L. Nummularia. 

Primula elatior. Springfield. The flowers of this species 
were much larger than those of P. veris, and of a bright yel- 
low; the umbel generally consisting of from six to eight 
flowers. 

d2 



36 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

Hotionia palustris. lu a ditch^ near Chelmsford ; flowers 
very large^ and handsome. 

Samolus Valerandi, Writtle. I have gathered specimens 
nearly a foot high. 

Campanula Rapunculus. Danbury Common^ near the seat 
of S. Phillips, Esq. ; very sparingly intermixed with C. Ro- 
tundifolia : about two feet high ; flowers more truly cam- 
panulate. 

Campanula hybrida. This species I have occasionally 
found in corn-fields in the vicinity of Chelmsford, and in 
one or two instances with the blooms as large as a sixpence, 
and nearly approaching in appearance to the C. speculum. 

Gentiana Amarella. Broomfield near Chelmsford. 

Bupleurum rotundifolium, Springfield ; in a chalky soil. 

Sambucus Ebulus. Danbury, near Chelmsford. 

Myosurus minimus. Corn-fields in the neighbourhood. 
In some cases I have observed the receptacle to be upwards 
of three inches. 

Peplis Portula, Danbury Common, near Chelmsford. 

Narcissus Pseudo-Narcissus, Abundantly in a wood at 
Broomfield. 

Convallaria majalis. In a small copse at Danbury. 

Acorus Calamus. On banks of the Chelmer, in Spring- 
field. 

Epilobium angustifolium. Danbury, near the Rodney Inn. 

Daphne Laureola. In a wood at Waltham, near Chelms- 
ford. 

Polygonum Bistorta. Danbury. 

Paris Quadri/olia. Thrift-wood, near Chelmsford. ' 

Adoxa Moschatellina. Shaded banks, Springfield. 

Butomus umbellatus. Banks of ditches, and of the Chel- 
mer, near Chelmsford. 

Chrysoplenium altemifolium. In a ditch in the Thrift- 
wood, with C. oppositifolium. 

Dianthus Armeria. Near Galley wood Common, Chelms- 
ford. 

Fragaria elatior. In a wood at Great Leighs ; assuredly 
wild. 

Thalictrum flavum. Springfield. 

Anemone nemorosa. Frequent in copses, near Chelms- 
ford. 

Ranunculus parviflorus. Abundant on a bank at Spring- 
field. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETV OP LONDON. 37 

Mentha rubra. Great Leighs^ near Chelmsford. 

GaleobdoUm luteum. Near Galleywood Common. 

Lamium amplexicaule. This I have found in a cultivated 
field at Danbury. 

Scutellaria minor. Galleywood Common. 

Linaria spuria^ 1 Growing together in corn-fields, near 
— Elatine. ] Chelmsford. 

Orobanche mqjor, and 0. elatior. On the roots of Broom 
&c., at Danbury Common. 

(Read June Ist.J 

Some Remarks under the above title were read before the 
Society, on May 4th ; during the past summer I have cor- 
roborated the stations I then gave for several plants, and 
discovered fresh ones for some others, comprising :— 

Utricularia vulgaris. This plant grew abundantly in a 
pond at Broomfield, near Chelmsford, and was gathered in 
July, 1837; its large and beautiful blossoms rendered it a 
striking object when floating upon the water, which was of 
a considerable depth; and the roots or subaquatic foliage 
were several feet long, consisting of an innumerable multi- 
tude of fibres, studded with minute vesicles, which at this 
period were filled with air. 

Erythrea Centaurium (white variety). Found upon the 
clifis at Southend, Essex; the pink variety was growing 
plentifully with it. 

Bupleurum falcatum. This species, which was so recently 
discovered by my friend Thomas Corder, grows plenti- 
fully at a village called Norton Mandeville, near Ongar, 
Essex, about five miles from Chelmsford. The umbel is of 
a light yellow, and the leaves falcate, and of a brownish 
green. The root is fibrous, and seems to flourish best in 
shaded banks, where it attains the height of four or five 
feet. It generally flowers rather late in the summer; speci- 
mens having been gathered so late as the 29th August. 

Allium ursinum. This plant seems rare with us, it is 
found in the Thrift-wood, near Chelmsford, and even there 
but very sparingly. 

TVifflochin paluitre. On a common at Danbury, Essex. 
The most striking peculiarity of this plant seems to be its 
capsules, which as they advance to maturity, attain a very 
considerable length. 



40 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

Vicia sepium. Common on hedge-banks^ &c. I have 
found a variety of this plant with white flowers, and pale 
green leaves, but not differing materially in other respects. 

Omithopus perptisilltis. Gravelly pastures, near Chelms- 
ford. 

Trifolium subierraneum. Galleywood Common, Chelms- 
ford ; where it flourishes, almost buried beneath the turf. 

T. ochroleucum. Clay-pit, near Chelmsford, with Lathyrus 
Aphaca. 

T, medium. Broomfield, near Chelmsford ; very similar in 
appearance to T. pratense,but of a deeper purple, and having 
larger leaflets. 

Medicago maculata. Abundantly at Springfield, near 
Chelmsford ; leaflets invariably marked with a black spot, in 
the centre. 

Hypericum Androsamum. Danbury Park, near Chelms- 
ford ; but sparingly. 

Crepis biennis. Banks of Chelmer. This species is quite 
distinct from C. tectorum, in having larger flowers, and hairy 
involucre. 

Cichorium Intybus. Margaretting, near Chelmsford. 

Carduus tenuijhrus. Peering, near Chelmsford; abun- 
dantly. 

Conyza squarrosa. Springfield, near Chelmsford. This 
plant I found formerly in this neighbourhood, but it now ap- 
pears extinct; although I believe it is by no means uncom- 
mon. 

Doronicum plantagineum. I have cultivated specimens of 
this plant, which were procured from Saling, Essex ; but I 
consider it is not entitled to a place in the Local Flora. 

Achillea Ptarmica. In ditches, Springfield Common. 

Anthemis nobilis. Abundantly on Galleywood Common ; 
where it grows so luxuriant, as to be sought for by chemists 
and others, for its valuable medicinal qualities. 

Centaurea solstitialis. In a field at Springfield, Essex, 
growing among Medicago saliva ; but most probably intro- 
duced with the seed with which the field was sowed, as I have 
never found it anywhere else in the neighbourhood. 

*:ic* In the very interesting family of Orchideae, I will 
enumerate all that are found in this part of Essex. None 
of the species noticed are abundant, as the soil is of a 
light gravelly nature, and in many districts consisting of 
a strong loam, which is by no means calculated for a plentiful 
development of this beautiful tribe. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 41 

Orchis Morio. Wet meadows at Springfield ; where I 
have gathered it with a spike of flowers from three to four 
inches long. 

0. mascula. Springfield and Writtle. 

O. maculata. Near the Chelmer, Chelmsford. 

Gymnadenia Conopsea. Writtle^ near Chelmsford. 

Habenaria bi/olia. Woods at Broomfield. I have gathered 
specimens of this species about two feet high^ with a spike of 
flowers nearly ten inches long. 

Ophrys api/era. Great Leighs^ near Chelmsford ; where 
I have obtained very fine specimens. 

Neottia spiralis. Danbury Heath, Essex ; a very obscure 
delicate litte plant. 

Listera Nidus-avis. Newland^s Wood, Broomfield ; spar- 
ingly. 

L. ovata. Thrift Wood, near Chelmsford. 

Epipactis palustris. Galleywood Common, Chelmsford. 

E. latifolia. Broomfield, near Chelmsford. 

Euphorbia platyphyUa. Great Leighs, near Chelmsford. 
, Sparganium natans. Broomfield, near Chelmsford. 

Car ex ^ pulicaris. Galleywood Common, Chelmsford; 
which is also a station for the following species : — 

C stellulata, remota^ pendula^ pallescensy fiava^ binervisy 
panicetty recurva^ acuta^ vesicaria. 

Viscum album. Common on the apple tree, and Prunus 
spinosay in Sir J. Tyn-elPs Park, Boreham, near Chelmsford. 

Humultis hapulus. Common, and to dl appearance indi- 
genous. 

FERNS. 

Aspidium lobatum. Springfield ; not uncommon. 

A. angulare. Chelmsford. This is the species frequently 
known by the name A, aculeatum. 

A Thelypteris. In a boggy wood, at Danbury. 

Asplenium Trichomanes. Shaded bank, Chelmsford. 

A. Adiantum nigrum. Growing with the above. 

Scolopendrium vulgare. Springfield, Essex. 

Osmunda regalis. Danbury, Essex ; very luxuriant. 

Lycopodium clavatum. Danbury, Essex. 

Of the Equisetacea which flourish at Chelmsford, there 
are E. fluviatile, E. arvense^ E. sylvaticum^ & E. limosum. 



42 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

Mr. G. E. Dennes read a Translation of Professor Meyen^s 
Memoir^ on the Circulation of the proper juice in plants. 



MAY 18th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

A Paper was read by Mr. Manley Hopkins on the subject 
of Vegetable Fermentation, of which the following is but 
a brief abstract.* 

" The author, after remarking on the changes and muta- 
tions which are continually undergoing in bodies — in the 
vegetable and mineral kingdoms in particular — proceeded, 
first, to describe the phenomena attendant on the formation 
of sugar, and the various modes in which sugar is formed. 
Mr. Hopkins conceives, that all the products of fermenta- 
tion arise from the diminution of carbon ; and that the great 
discrepancies which we find in the analyses of different che- 
mists, is to be accounted for by the various objects they had 
in view, while instituting their experiments ; for instance, in 
the relative degrees of purity and of dryness, and chiefly 
from the presence of other substances, which, though bearing 
an affinity to the body under examination, should neverthe- 
less be considered distinct, as having a different elementary 
composition. By the process of fermentation, the nature of 
sugar becomes entirely altered, and with it are also changed 
and modified the other ingredients which were in combina- 
tion with it — ^its great characteristic, sweetness, being entirely 
lost. From the experiments of Berzelius, Berard, Gay 
Lussac, and Thenard, it would appear, that in the former 
periods of fermentation, carbonic acid is always disengaged : 
this, however, is not a necessary process. The oxygen which 
is used, goes into combination, and not to produce carbonic 
acid gas. The author is of opinion, whatever the results of 
Rosin^s and Saussure's experiments may be to the contrary, 
that acetification depends almost exclusively upon an internal 

* The following report is extracted from the Meeting of the Society in the 
Athenaeum, June 3rd, 1837. 



BOTANICAL 60CIBTY OP LONDON. 43 

action ; and that the atmospheric air is of no further use 
than in furnishing nitrogen to aid the process. Gluten, 
when present, is certainly a great incentive to fermentation, 
and it is further heightened by acetic acid. The development 
of heat may be accounted for, first, by the theory of the 
co-production of alcohol; and secondly, from latent heat 
being developed when the oxygen enters into the state of 
acid. In the process of putrefaction, there is always a re- 
carbonization of part of the ingredients, and a consequent 
evolution of hydrogen. But though immense masses of 
vegetation are continually undergoing destruction, by a dis- 
organization of their component elements, these afford nutri- 
ment for a new generation ; and it is clear that there is also 
a symmetrical proportion ip the various other departments of 
nature, — that the same causes which operate on one part of 
her works, very frequently operate alike in the other depart- 
ments. A discussion afterwards ensued upon the various 
topics broached by Mr. Hopkins, after which the Society 
adjoumed.^^ 



JUNE 1st, and JULY 6th. 
J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

At the former meeting, the second part of Mr. Arthur 
Wallis^s Paper on the Flora of Chelmsford, was read. (See 
p. 3 7.) Specimens of Leucojum ^stivum, from the marshes by 
the river side, between Woolwich and Greenwich, Kent, were 
exhibited and distributed by Mr. D. Cooper, who described 
the locality as being at the bend of the river, directly facing 
the Plough Tavern, Blackwall. The continuation and con- 
clusion of Mr. Manley Hopkinfi^s paper on Vegetable Fer- 
mentation, occupied the remaining portion of the first even- 
ing, and the entire of the meeting held July 6th. 



44 PROCBEDINGS OP THE 



AUGUST 3rd. 

John Reynolds^ Esq., Treasurer, in the Chair. 

Mr. Dennes read a translation of the report made to the 
Academy of Sciences at Paris, by M. Mirbel, Dutrochet, 
and St. Hilaire, on the structure and development of the ge- 
nerative organs of a species of Marsilea^ found by M. Esprit 
Fabre, near Agde. From the Annalcs des Sciences Natu- 
relles. 



SEPTEMBER 7th.^ 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

The following communication, accompanied with drawings, 
was read from Mr. R. H. Schomburgk, dated New Amster- 
dam, River Berbice, May 11th, ISS?, on what he considered 
to be a new species of Nymphaa, but which the President 
had compared with the specimens of Nymphaacea in the 
Herbarium of the British Museum, and was satisfied that it 
would form a new group intermediate between Nymphaea and 
Euryale ; and therefore proposed that Mr. Schomburgk's in- 
tention of naming it after her present Majesty Victoria 
should be carried into execution, her Majesty hav- 
ing previously granted her permission. It was therefore 
named Victoria Regina, and the Society has adopted this 
plant as its emblenf.* Mr. S. describes it thus : — 

Victoria Regina. — Schomburgk. 

N. foliis orbiculatis integerrimis subtus coloratis, supra reticulate 
areolatis, utrinque glabro; nervis venisque subtus prominentis, 
aculeatis. Stigmata multi-radiato. Petiolis teretibus acu- 
leatis. Guiana adfluv, Berbiceum, ^ 

* See the Plate facing the Title page. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 45 



Th£ character of grandeur so peculiar to the productions 
of a tropical sun and a humid climate is highly developed in 
the object of the above description. The Holy Cyamus or 
Pythagorean Bean is said to have been derived from a plant 
closely related to the Nymphseaceae, (Nelumbium speciosum^) 
and not only that it is highly valued in India and China, and 
cultivated in large ornamental pots in the gardens and houses 
of the Mandarins, but it has been held in such high estima- 
tion that at last it was considered sacred. The description 
and illustrations which have been transmitted to us of this 
noble plant, have raised a desire in many a botanist^ to see it 
in its native country. In my rambles through the West 
Indian Archipelago, I had frequently met the white Water 
Lily; but the remark of an eminent botanist, that these 
floating plants were entirely unknown on the continent of 
South America, did not make me expect to find a repre- 
sentative of that tribe, which, for the superior grandeur of 
its leaves, the beauty of its flowers, and its fragrance, may be 
classed amongst the grandest productions of the vegetable 
world. It was on the Ist of January this year, while con- 
tending with the difficulties nature opposed in different forms 
to our progress up the river Berbice, (in British Guiana) that 
we arrived at a point where the river expanded and formed a 
currentless basin. Some object on the southern extremity of 
this basin attracted my attention. It was impossible to form 
any idea what it could be, and animating the crew to increase 
the rate of their paddling, shortly afterwards we were oppo- 
site the object which had raised my curiosity. A vegetable 
wonder ! all calamities were forgotten, I felt as a botanist, and 
felt myself rewarded. A gigantic leaf, from five to six feet 
in diameter ; salver shaped, with a broad rim of light green 
above, and a vivid crimson below, resting upon the water. 
Quite in character with the wonderful leaf, was the luxuriant 
flower, consisting of many hundred petals, passing in alter- 
nate tints from pure white to rose and pink. The smooth 
water was covered with them, and I rowed from one to the 
other, and observed always something new to admire. The 
leaf on its surface is of a bright green, in form almost orbi- 
culate, with this exception, opposite its axis, where it is 
slightly bent in. Its diameter measured from five to six feet; 
around the whole margin extended a rim about three to five 
inches high, on the inside light green, like the surface of the 
leaf, on the outside, like the leaPs lower part, of a bright 



46 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

crimson. The ribs are very prominent, almost an inch high, 
and radiate from a common centre, and consist of eight prin- 
cipal ones, with a great many others branching oflF from them. 
These are crossed again by a raised membrane, or bands at 
right angles, which gives the whole the appearance of a 
spider's web, and are beset with prickles ; the veins contain 
air cells like the petiole and flower stem. The divisions of 
the ribs and bands are visible on the upper surface of the 
leaf, by which it appears areolated. The young leaf is con- 
volute, and expands but slowly ; the prickly stem ascends 
with the young leaf till it has reached the surface ; by the 
time it is developed, its own weight depresses the stem, and 
it floats now on the water. The stem of the flower is an inch 
thick near the calyx, and is studded with sharp elastic prickles, 
about three quarters of an inch in length. The calyx is four- 
leaved, each upwards of seven inches in length, and three 
inches in breadth ; at the base they are thick, white inside, 
reddish brown and prickly outside. The diameter of the 
calyx is twelve to thirteen inches, on it rests the magni- 
ficent flower, which, when fully developed, covers completely 
the calyx with its hundred petals. When it first opens, it is 
white, with pink in the middle, which spreads over the whole 
flower, the more it advances in age, and it is generally found 
the next day of a pink colour. As if to enhance its beauty, it 
is sweet-scented. Like others of its tribe it possesses a 
fleshy disk, and the petals and stamens pass gradually into 
each other, and many petaloid leaves may be observed which 
have vestiges of an anther. The petals next to the leaves of 
the calyx are fleshy, and possess air-cells, which certainly 
must contribute to the buoyancy of the flower. The seeds 
of the many-celled fruit are numerous, and imbedded in a 
spongy substance. We met them hereafter frequently, and 
the higher we advanced the more gigantic they became. We 
measured a leaf, which was six feet five inches in diameter, 
its rim five and a half inches high, and the flower across fif- 
teen inches. The flower is much injured by a beetle, (Tri- 
chius, ^^Spec.?'^) which destroys completely the inner part 
of the disk, we have counted sometimes from twenty to 
thirty in one flower. 



¦( 



\ 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 4? 

Explanation of Plate 5. 
{Facing THtle page.) 

Fig, 1. fruit 

2. perfect \ - 

3. drooping J^'^ 

4. flower bud 

Plate 6. 

1 . a vertical section of the flower to show the gradual 
passage of petals into stamens 

2. a vertical section of the flower, the petals mostly removed 

3. a vertical section of the fruit 

4. a young seed 

5. a transverse section of the stem 






ft 



OCTOBER 5th. 

John Reynolds^ Esq., Treasurer, in the Chair. 

A Paper, accompanied by a drawing, was read from Mr* 
R. H. Schomburgk, on a new species of Loranthus^ which 
he called Loranth/us Smythii^ in honour of Lady Janies 
Carmichael Smyth, a great admirer of Botany. 

L. Smythii. — Schomburgk. 

Ramis teretibua 2 — 3 chotomis; Dodosis; foliis subfoliatis vel 
acinaciformis, patentissimis, coriaceis, 4 — 5 nerviid ; peduncuHs 
axillaribus 2 — 3 chotomis ; bracteis coloratis ; coriaceis sub- 
ternifloris. Adfluv. Berbiceum, 

This Loranthus distinguishes itself from all those I have 
hitherto seen, not only by its elegance, but likewise by the 
vivacity of the colour of its flowers and floral leaves, and the 
aromatic fragrance of the former. Like most of its tribe, it 
is a parasite, and it roots so firmly in the w^ood of other 
trees, that only the difierent form of the leaves, and the two 
and three chotomous growth of its branches, removes the 
mistake if it should be found without flowers. 
. The branches are terete, knotted at the place of their divi- 
sion, and are of a greyish colour ; the branchlets are green, 



48 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

likewise knotted^ and towards their end of a lake colour ; the 
coriaceous leaves are opposite^ entire, four to five nerved, 
sometimes foliate, while others are rather acinaciform. The 
inflorescence forms a Cyme, the peduncles are axillary, and 
divide repeatedly in two or three, each being provided with 
a bractea partly accompanying two or three flowers. The 
bractea is of a vermilion colour, and siurounds the sessile 
flowers ; the calyx is slightly densated, and of a similar co- 
lour ; the corolla is tubular, of a bright yellow, tinged with 
orange and red ; it has six petals divided to the base, and 
connected so closely with the stamens that the latter appear 
to arise from the corolla, while their rudiments may be 
traced to the base of the petal, where they are inserted in 
the ovary. After the flower bud has expanded, the segments 
roll backwards to the point where the stamen becomes free ; 
on each side of the stamen (where it becomes free from the 
corolla) rises a small prominence from the segment of the 
corolla. By its convolution the tubular corolla resembles the 
capital of a column. The stamens are equal in number to 
the petals, the style is simple, the stigma rounded, the an- 
ther incumbent, two-lobed, each lobe with a longitudinal 
line of dehiscence. When the filament is attached to the 
anther, the first as well as the latter is villose. The fruit is a 
berry, one-celled, seed solitary, testa membraneous. 



Mr. Joseph Freeman then communicated the results of 
his excursions in the vicinity of Stratford, Leytonstone, 
JVansteady and Snaresbrook, Essex. In the immediate 
vicinity of Stratford, Mr. Freeman found 

51 Natural Orders 
133 Genera 
183 Species 

On account of the proximity of Stratford to London, the 
following localities for the rarer species might not be unac- 
ceptable to the Metropolitan Botanist. 

Ranunculus arvensis . Fields near Temple Mills, 
Nuphar lutea . . . River Lea, near do. 

Corydalis lutea . . . Found some years since on a wall at 

Upton. The wall having been re- 
cently repaired, the plant has disap- 
peared. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 49 

Cardamine amara . . By the river side, on the long wall 

near the Abbey Mill. 
Malva moschata . . Cann Hall Lane. 
Saponaria officinalis • Forest Lane, (believed to be its only 

habitat.) 
Sedum Telephium . On a bank by the road side, leading 

from Stratford to Leyton. 
Cerastis Padus • • • Forming a hedge in a field on the 

right hand of the lane leading from 

Stratford to Temple Mills. 
Inula Helenium . . . Plaistow Marshes. 
Hottonia palustris • . In a ditch by the side of the short 

wall, Stratford, a very little distance 

from the high road. 
Butomus umbellatus . Plaistow Marshes. In a ditch not 

far from the Prince Regent. 
With respect to the number found spontaneously growing 
in the vicinity of Leytonstone, Wanstead, and Snaresbrook, 
Mr. Freeman had observed of 

Natural Orders . • 57 

Genera 138 

Species 191 



Mr. Wallis communicated a continuation of his Paper on 
the Flora of Chelmsford, as inserted p. 39. 

Dr. Bossey exhibited a series of grasses including Ahpe- 
curus pratensis, Lolium perenne, Holcus lanatus, &c., which 
were a^ected with Uredo segetum. 

Mr. W. M. Chatterley then read some extracts from M. A. 
DecandoUe^s Memoir on Alimentary Plants, accompanied by 
a chart of the world, in which were laid down the boundaries, 
north and south, as mentioned by that author. 

The Curator stated, that he had in the course of the sea- 
son, much conversation with farmers and others on the 
Essex side of the river, and who informed him that since 
the increased navigation of steam vessels on the Thames, 
they had found their land considerably improved; which 
they attributed to the fact of the prevailing winds blowing 
the smoke, and depositing the soot on that side of the river. 
This subject was fully discussed. 



E 



50 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 



NOVEMBER 2nd. 
Dr. p. C. Macreight, V.P., F.L.S., in the Chair. 

NOVEMBER 16th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

These two evenings were occupied with Dr. Bossey^s 
Paper on the ^^ Fungi which attack the cereal grain.^^ He 
spoke principally of the Uredo segetum and U. carieSj the 
grasses which they affect, and the deleterious effects when 
taken into the system as food or medicine. 

Dr. B. enumerated the following species of grasses on 
which he had found the Acinula clavus^ in the neighbourhood 
of Woolwich, Kent, which were exhibited ; 

Alopecurus pratensis Bromus secalinus 

• . . agrestis . • moUis 

. . . geniculatus Arundo Phragmites 

Phleum pratense Hordeum murinum 

Holcus lanatus . • . pratense 

Arrhenatherum avenaceum Triticum repens 
Dactylis glomerata Secale cereale 

Festuca duriuscula Lolium perenne 

• • pratensis 



NOVEMBER 29th. 
J. E. Gray, Esq., P.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Anniversary Meeting. 

The Secretary read the Annual Report, of which the fol- 
lowing is an extract : — 

The Council of the Botanical Society of London, in sur- 
rendering their trust into the hands of the members, have 
great pleasure in announcing the present state of the associ- 
ation, and trusting to the continued support and exertions of 
numerous members and friends, look with confidence to the 
future. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON, 51 

The number of members, amounting to sixty five, of which 
the new members elected for the ensuing session far exceeds 
the expectations of the council, who are at the same time 
happy to state, that they have received but ten notices of se- 
cession of members. 

The council refer with pleasure to the list of donations to 
the Library, Herbarium and Museum, and hope that the se- 
veral donors, and the others members, will not cease either 
their favours or their exertions. 

Tlie names of the various donors to the Library, are as 
follows : — Messrs. Gray, Macreight, Reynolds, Charlesworth, 
J. F. Young, Bossey, Maclntyre, Dennes, Cooper, J. and G. 
Rich, White, Bell, W. Pamplin, Jun., W. Baxter, Hancock, 
Mrs. Gawler, &c. &c. 

The report of the Curator with respect to the Herbarium 
is as follows : — ^The names of the various donors are, R. Ley- 
land, Halifax, Yorkshire ; C. Conway, Pontnewydd, Mon- 
mouthshire ; A. Wallis, Chelmsford, Essex ; W. Baxter, Bo- 
tanic Garden, Oxford; W. Gardiner, Dundee; Dr. Bell 
Salter, Poole, Dorsetshire ; Dr. Ranking, Hastings ; Miss 
Perry, Stroud, near Godalming, Surrey ; — and the following, 
residing in London ; Messrs. J. F. Young ; D. Cooper; G. E. 
Dennes; W. M. Chatterley ; M. Hopkins; J. and G. Rich; 
W. H. White ; W. A. Lewis ; R. Davis ; Dr. D. C. Ma- 
creight ; Mrs. Gawler ; Mrs. Dennison, &c. — ^To these ladies 
and gentlemen the Society is indebted for several valuable 
presents of British and Foreign collections of dried plants. 
The number of British plants received amount to 4819 spe- 
dmens, including Ferns; 7^7 species, including 1313 speci- 
mens, have been arranged in the Herbarium, according to 
the system of Decandolle. The remaining 3506 duplicates, 
including 515 species, will be distributed to those persons 
who have favoured the Curator with lists of desiderata for 
that purpose. 

The distribution will take place under the direction of the 
council in the months of December and January every year, 
when each member will receive such of his desiderata as may 
be contained among the duplicates in the Herbarium, in pro- 
portion to his contributions. Those gentlemen who have not 
contributed to the Herbarium, receiving their duplicates 
after the distribution of the contributors has taken place. 
The council beg also to inform the members, that in order to 
afford every facility for examining the Herbarium and Li- 
brary, the Rooms of the Society will be open one hour and a 

E 2 



52 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

half previous to the ordinary meetings of the Society, when 
the Citrator and Secretary will attend to render any assist- 
ance that may be required, and to circulate the books. lu 
addition to the extensive and valuable collection of British 
plants, the council beg to announce the receipt of a large 
collection of French plants, supposed to be a portion of the 
Herbarium of Jean Jacques Rousseau, together with some 
plants from Mahon Minorca, presented by Mr. G. E. Dennes. 
Another collection of Foreign plants from America, collected 
by the Officers of the Hudson's Bay Company, has been 
presented by Joseph Freeman, Esq. Also specimens of Ly- 
copodium Circinnatum, from the President, sent by Dr. 
Forbes, F.R.S. of Chichester. Specimens of three new Bri- 
tish plants have been received, viz., Claytonia Alsinoides, 
from Mr. W. Baxter, of Oxford ; also a moss new to Britain, 
Cinclidium Stygium^ from Mr. Ley land, of Halifax ; and spe- 
cimens, of which there are many duplicates, of Spartina AU 
temi/oliay from Itchin Ferry, Southampton, presented by 
Dr. Macreight, V. P. 

The Society have also received from Mr. R. H. Schom- 
burgk, now travelling in British Guiana, papers accompa- 
nied with drawings on the two following interesting plants, 
viz: Victoria Regina and Loranthus Smythii. Also dona- 
tions of seeds from the Cape of Good Hope, presented by 
M. Schmidt. 

The council have also great pleasure in announcing that 
the Society is much indebted to the following gentlemen for 
their communications, — Dr. Bossey, Dr. Maclntyre, Messrs. 
Schomburgk, G. E. Dennes, M. Hopkins, J. Reynolds, H. 
A. Meeson, A. Lewis, W. M. Chatterley, Joseph Freeman, 
D. Cooper, A. Irvine, A. Wallis, &c. 

The report was unanimously adopted. 

The chairman then announced the commencement of the 
ballot, for the election of officers for the ensuing year, when 
the following gentlemen were elected : — 



John Edward Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President 
J. Reynolds, Esq., TVeasurer, \ Daniel Cooper, Esq., Curator. 

G. E. Dennes, Esq., Secretary. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 53 



Other members of the Council — 



Francis Bosset, M.D. 
Edward Charlssworth, Esq., F.G.S. 
, W. M. Chatterlet, Esq. 
Joseph Freeman, Esq. 
T. W. Greene, Esq., B.CL. F.H.S. 
Charles Johnson, Esq. 



D. C. Macreiort, M.D. F.L.S. 
iENBAs MacInttre, L.L.D. F.L.S. 
W. H. Ranking, M.D. 
James Rich, Esq. 
W. H. White, Esq. 



The President then proceeded to appoint two Vice-Presi- 
dents^ from the Councu^ and named 

Dr. D. C. MACREIGHT, F.L.S., and CHARLES JOHNSON, Esq. 

A vote of thanks having been given to the President for 
his unremitting zeal and attention to the afiairs of the So- 
ciety, and also to the retiring members of the Council, the 
meeting adjourned. 



DECEMBER 7th. 

Daniel Cooper, Esq., A.L.S., Curator, in the Chair. 

A translation from SprengePs work on " Cryptogamous 
Plants,^^ was read from the chairman, '^ On the character, 
affinities, places of growth, economical uses, and geographical 
distribution of the Mosses. ^^ 



DECEMBER 21st. 

John Reynolds, Esq., Treasurer, in the Chair. 

This meeting was chiefly occupied with the remaining 
portion of the Curator's translation of the former paper on 
the Mosses. 



54 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

1838. 

JANUARY 4th. 
Dr. Francis Bossey, ia the Chair. 

JANUARY 19th. 
Daniel Cooper, Esq., A.L.S*, Curator, in the Chair. 

These two evenings were occupied with Mrj G. E. Dennes^s 
paper translated from the Annales des Sciences Naturelles 
for March 1837^ *^ On the structure and development of the 
generating organs of a species of MarsUea^^ found by M. Es- 
prit Fabre about the environs of Agde. 



FEBRUARY 2nd. 

W, H. White, Esq., in the Chair. 

Mr. Woods presented the Society with a New Botanical 
Thermometer ; and communicated through the Secretary the 
following remarks : — 

On the Influence of Barometric pressure on Plants^ ifc. 

In presenting the Botanical Society of London with an 
Improved Botanical Thermometer, I intend, in this short 
communication, to offer a few remarks on the influence of 
Barometric pressure on some species of plants, particularly 
exotics. 

The effects of Barometric pressure on the animal and ve- 
getable kingdom are plainly discovered in the instances of 
quadrupeds of the inferior class, and plants found on moun- 
tains, and other elevated situations. The influence of tem- 
perature, or the effects of heat, when it exceeds the mean of 
such localities, is not so influential on the physical growth 
of plants as the increase or diminution of pressure. This 
will appear obvious on comparing the size of plants in such 
situations with those of the same kind in less elevated parts 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 55 

of the earth; where they are subjected to a much greater 
pressure ; — ^thus the diminution in the size of plants is gene-* 
rally in a nearly uniform ratio with our ascent from the mean 
level of the globe, and vice versa. 

In a climate like England where the mean of Barometric 
pressure is, on an average of years, 29,500 inches, but little 
calculations are made for the effects of pressure, although on 
many occasions plants are exposed to a greater or lesser 
degree than at others. Many Botanists, however, consider 
that as heat is the prime mover of vegetable organization, by 
keeping the Thesrmometric column at the same height for 
Myrtles, as marked on the graduated scale, is aU that is 
necessary ; when, were they but to observe the effects upon 
the foliage when the Barometer is at twenty-nine or thirty 
inches, they would see the necessity of an increase of tempe- 
rature when the Barometer is very low and vice versfi ; un- 
less an easterly or north-easterly wind prevail. From this it 
will be seen how to preserve plants reared between the tro- 
pics (where the Barometer is nearly at the same height ;) 
for these plants are much affected by the fluctuations of the 
mercury in the tube of the Barometer. 

In conclusion, I feel persuaded were Botanists to investi- 
gate strictly the laws of atmospherical phenomena, and com- 
bine in their researches Meteorology with the science of 
Botany, their field of observation would become greatly en- 
larged, and their plants preserved. 



FEBRUARY 16th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Mr. W. H. White read a Paper, being a translation of M. 
Martens " On Hybridity occurring in FernsJ*'* 

Fbrns are generally regarded by Botanists as Agamous 
plants, which cannot be reproduced by seed. The sporules 
with which the undersides of their leaves are studded, are 
generally considered analagous to the little bulbs, which are 
often met with upon several Phanerogamous plants. Viewed 
in this light. Ferns could not produce hybrids ; or rather, 

• From the Bulletin of the Royal Academy of Brussels, No. 2, 1837. 



56 PROCEEDINGS. OF THE 

hybrid Ferns could never be obtained, as we obtain Phseno- 
gamous hybrids, having the seeds of one species fecundated 
by the seminal powder of a neighbouring species. 

The following circumstance has, however, recently been veri- 
fied in one of the greenhouses at the Botanical Garden at Lou- 
vain, and does not leave any doubt of the fact, that cases of 
Hybridity in Ferns are to be met with; and, therefore, that 
this interesting family of vegetables, ought to be ranked 
among those plants that are endowed with sexual organs ; 
which justifies the division proposed by the same Botanists, of 
the Acotyledonous plants of Jtissieu into Cryptogamous, pro- 
perly called AgamouSy and ranking them in the following 
manner amxmg the Mosses, HepatioB, LycopoduB, and Ferns, — 
which are considered as having very smaU, but indistinct 
sexual organs. However this may be, it appears there is no 
occasion to doubt that neighbouring species of Ferns may 
sometimes produce Hybrid species, in the same manner as 
those plants which are furnished with very apparent sexual 
organs. The following fact is sufficient to dispel every 
doubt on the subject. 

There had been cultivated for some time in one of the 
greenhouses of the Botanical Garden, at Louvain, two beau- 
tiful species of Ferns, the Gymnogramma chrysophylla, 
(Spr.) and the Gymnogramma calomelanos (Kaulf)* Two 
very distinct species and different from each other, especially 
as one of them has the underside of the leaves or fronds 
covered with a most beautiful golden yellow powder, and the 
other has the underside of its fronds furnished with a bright 
silvery powder, and has besides, its foliage much larger 
and diversely dentated. 

These two species were placed very near to each other, and 
there was not any other species of Fern in the greenhouse. 
The head gardener, Denkelaar, wishing to increase the Gym- 
nogramma chrysophylla, on account of the beauty of its foliage, 
sowed the sporules with great care in several small pots 
under glasses. These sporules came up very plentifully, but 
instead of finding Ferns like the mother plant, they fur- 
nished, with two or three exceptions. Ferns, the forms of 
which partook of the characters of both species, in such a 
manner, as to be intermediate between those of G. chryso- 
phylla and G. calomelanos, and more strongly resembled the 
latter than the former species, which may with propriety be 
termed their parent. Thus, instead of having plants whose 
foUage has a brilliant golden yellow on the underside, as in 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 57 

the Gymnogramma chrysophylla^ we had Fems^ the underside 
of the leaves of which showed a powder of a dull pale 
yellow^ approaching nearer to the silver colour of the 6. 
calomelanos. 

The foliage of the new Ferns is as lai^e^ or even larger 
than that of the latter species, and forms a complete contrast 
to the delicate and elegant foliage of the G. chrysophylla. 
The form of the fronds also resembles more the fronds of the 
6. calomelanos than those of their mother plant. Their 
pinnules instead of being oval-shaped as in the G. chryso- 
phylla are more or less lanceolated^ elongated^ and pinnati- 
fid^ as in the G. calomelanos ; in such a manner one may 
say^ as the abstraction made from the yellowish powder from 
the underside of the fronds^ the new hybrid species of the 
Fern approached nearer to the G. calomelanos than to the 
G. chiysophylla, although proceeding from the underside 
of the latter species. 

But to form a more correct judgment of the analogy^ and 
the difference between our hybrid species and those from 
which it has been produced^ I have described the distinct 
characters of the three species in question. 

Gymnogramma chrysopkyllay Spr. Frondibus bipinnatis^ 
pinnis lanceolatis^ pinnulis approximatis sessilibus ovatis 
incisis striatis^ superioribus coadunatis^ subtus aureo-fari- 
nosis. 

Gymnogrammxi calomelanosy Kaulf. Frondibus bipinnatis^ 
pinnis apice attenuatis^ pinnulis lanceolatis acuminatis inciso- 
serratis, inferioribus pinnatifidis^ summis confluentibus^ 
subtus albo-farinosis. 

Gymnogramma hybridan Nobis. Frondibus bipinnatis, 
pinnis apice attenuatis, pinnulis ovato-lanceolatis inciso-ser- 
ratis, inferioribus pinnatifidis^ summis confluentibus^ subtus 
flavicantibus. 

The above remarks led to a long discussion^ in which 
several members expressed their doubts^ as to the power 
of plants so low in the scale producing hybrids. The Secre- 
tary then announced that Mr. D. Cooper would at the next 
meeting commence a course of three Lectures on Botany, 
one hour previous to the Chair being taken, and continue 
them every night of meeting, at the same time, until com- 
pleted, and to which the members and their friends were 
invited. 



bS PROCEEDINGS OF THE 



MARCH 2nd. 
John Reynolds, Esq., Treasurer, in the Chair. 

Previous to the ordinary business of the evening, Mr. D. 
Cooper delivered the first lecture on Botany. 

Mr. W, H. White read the following Paper on a new 
species of Epilobiura, communicated to him by M. Den- 
Kalaar. 

In 1830, a collection of seeds was sent from the Botanical 
Garden of St. Petersburgh, by Dr. Fischer, to the Botanical 
Garden of Louvain, the greater part of them from Central 
Russia. Among the number of packages was one of an Epi" 
lobiumy without any specific name, and with the indication 
new species. 

The following particulars have been transmitted to me by 
M. Denkalaar, chief gardener at the Botanical Garden 
Louvain, relative to the culture of this new species of Epi^ 
labium; and, as it contains some interesting remarks, I 
thought I could not make better use of them than by laying 
them before this Society. 

This plant has been cultivated with the greatest care; and 
from a minute observance of its developments, and researches 
made into its characters, the cultivators have become con- 
vinced that up to the present time, this species has neither 
been described nor cultivated elsewhere. In order, therefore, 
to give a faithful exposition of its characters, and to make it 
better known to the botanical world, the following specific 
denomination has been given to it, in accordance with the 
principles of the angibstissimum and rosmarinifolium. 

" Our plant has a straight stem, much branched, branches 
difiused and silky, furnished with alternate leaves, lanceolate, 
acuminate, and of a silky whiteness. Its flowers, disposed in 
loose ears, are at considerable distances, solitary, and of a 
pale rose colour ; stigma quadrifid and rather bent; the pod 
of the same length as the peduncle. 

" This description sufiiciently indicates that the species in 
question, belongs to a generic group, designated by Decan- 
dolle, in his Prodromus, by the name of CharruBnerion^ conse- 
quently to the same series in which is placed the EpHobinm 
angustissimum.^^ — Curtis. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 59 

This last species^ confounded by all authors "with EpUobium 
rosmarinifoliumy Haenke, (not Pursch^) until the publication 
of the Flora of Reichenbach, is in fact very different, as a 
long series of observations has proved, so that the above- 
named pubhcation has become comparatively useless by the 
publication of the Flora Excursoria. 

However this may be, I take the liberty of stating that 
Reichenbach has not shown the essential differences between 
these two species of plants. 

The one, in fact the EpUobium anguatissimum, so beautifully 
figured in Curtis^s Bot. Mag., PI. 76, has its ascendant stem 
difiuse, branched, reddish, as well as its branches ; its leaves 
linear4anceolate, obtuse, very smooth, marked with glandular 
serratures ; the flowers loose, solitary upon their footstalks, 
and flesh-coloured; stigma quadrified and bent; the pod 
twice as long as the footstalk. It flowers long before the 
following, and grows spontaneously in Batavia, Ireland, and 
Scotland. 

The other, the Epilobium rosmarinifoliuniy Haenke, is a 
plant from Bohemia and the Tyrol, and has, on the contrary, 
an erect stem, diffuse, very much branched ; branches 
spread ; leaves lanceolate and acuminate, nearly entire, very 
slightly pubescent ; a long ear, flowers more compact and of 
a puce colour ; the stigma is of the same length as the foot- 
stalk, but the pod is four times that length. 

In comparing the characters of the Epilobium angustissi- 
mum and rosmarinifolium with those of the Epilobium now 
described, the result is that the latter ought accordingly to 
be placed as intermediate between the other two, or, at least, 
as allied to both species. I propose to name it canescens, 
which will give a suitable idea of its habit. In recapitulating 
the characteristic traits of the three above-mentioned species, 
I think their mutual afiinities and their diagnostic characters 
will be fully determined as follows : — 

1. Epilobium canescenSy nob. Foliis lanceolatis, acumi- 
natis, integerrimis ; ramisque sericeo canescentibus ; siliqu& 
pedunculi longitudine. 

2. Epilobium ancfustissimum^ Curtis. Foliis lanceolato- 
linearibus, obtusis, glandulososerratis; ramisque glaberrimis, 
siliqud pedunculo duplo longiori. 

3. Epilobium rosmxirinifoliumy Haenke. Foliis lanceolatis, 
acuminatis, subintegerrimis, ramisque puberulis ; siliqua pe- 
dunculo quadruplo longiori. 

I will now beg leave to remark with respect to the Epi- 



60 PKOCEEDINGS OF THE 

labium anffustissimum of Curt.^ that^ that species furnishes a 
variety with leaves still more narrow and stem feeble^ which 
has been designated by the name of Epilobium Dodonm by 
Allioni^ of Epilobium Lobelli by Villars, of JS. Halleri by 
Retz ; and in later periods by E. angustissimum, E. alpinwn 
by Sering. 

And with respect to the E. rosmarinifolium^ Haenke, I beg 
leave to remark that it is a species totally distinct from his 
homonym, the £. romnarinifolium^ Pursch. This last is in 
fact a North American plants discovered in 1810 in the envi- 
rons of Philadelphia, and since by Bigelow, who calls it E. 
lineare ; some few years still later in a hundred places south- 
west of that city, in the territory of Boston. Nuttall has 
found it, and has given it the name of E. squamatum. 



MARCH 16th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President in the Chair. 

Previous to the meeting, Mr. D. Cooper delivered his se- 
cond lectm^e on Botany. After which the following remarks 
were read from J. Riley, Esq., of Nottingham, in a letter 
communicated to the Secretary : — 

I remark in the Literary Gazette of 24th February, that a 
Paper was read at the meeting of the Society ^^ OnHybridity 
inFems/^ communicated by M. Martensof the Royal Academy, 
Brussels. He states as a "verified fact^' t^at a Hybrid 
Fern has been raised at the Botanical Gardens, Louvain, so 
as to leave " no doubt^^ on the subject, — and draws his con- 
clusion that therefore Ferns ought to be classed amongst 
those plants which are endowed with sexual organs — ^and he 
states hybrids to be caused by the " seeds^^ of one species 
being fecundated by the " active powder^^ of a neighbouring 
species. The whole of these conclusions I do " doubt, ^* and 
I hope to state to you in a rather clearer light the true state 
of the matter. 

I think your Society will scarcely allow that " seeds ^^ 
when arrived at maturity, can be fecundated, or that the 
*^ powder" on the under surface oi^the fronds of the Gymno- 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 61 

grammse has any ^* activity f' for that purpose I will first set 
right the two species of Ferns which are both of the arrange- 
ment of Kaiilfuss, not Sprengel. 

Stehlin^ Hill, Maratti, Gleichen, Bemhardi, have each 
stated their discoveries of the anthers of Ferns, but all failed 
in establishing its truth, and their several theories have in 
the more advanced state of microscopic researches become 
obsolete. 

You are aware the sori of the genus Gymnogramma have 
no indusium or cover, and until the contraction of their elas- 
tic ring causes the capsules to burst, the seeds (or sporules 
more correctly speaking) are closely enclosed from outward 
contact. The seeds thus only become visible when arrived 
at maturity, and surely no one can imagine that the perfect 
seed of another plant placed beside them could produce in 
either one or the other, a hybrid plant. That a third Fern 
grew in the pot in which the sporules had been sown, I have 
no doubt, and to those at all conversant with such Botanical 
pursuits, it will not appear surprising, for I have frequently 
found Ferns, not only of another species, but of another 
genus spring up in the place of those I wished to grow. 

Having for a length of time been en^ged in growing 
Ferns from seed, as the only way (except by importation) of 
obtaining many species new to this country, I send you spe- 
cimens of three species of Gymnogramma, all raised by me 
from seed off fronds of their respective sorts, viz, Gymno- 
gramma chrysophylla and Gymnogramma calomelanos of 
Kaulfus, and Gymnogramma sulphurea of Desv. The latter 
one I consider the species, supposed by M. Martens to be 
his *^ Hybrid,*' as he probably was previously unacquainted 
with it. It partakes, as he describes, more of the nature of G. 
calomelanos than of G. chrysophylla, but is a most distinct 
species from either. 

By close examination of the capsules and sori of Ferns in 
their different stages of growth, and from the general belief 
also that generating organs in Ferns have never by the most 
minute inspection been discovered, I am clearly of opinion 
M. Martens has been deceived in his ^^fact,** and that it is 
much more easily to be accounted for by any person who has 
paid any attention to the ver}' numerous and extremely mi- 
nute particles of Fern seed, than in the loose and unscientific 
manner described by M. M. 

I should scarcely have thought it necessary to give this 
contradictory opinion to^M. M., had not the statement ap- 



62 PROCEEDINOS OF THE 

peared in the cohmms of the Literary Gazette^ and that 
emanating from so scientific a Society as the one you are 
connected with, might give the opinion of ^^ Hybndity in 
Ferns'^ a weight I am persuaded it does not deserve. 

Mr. Riley forwarded to the Society specimens of Gymno- 
gramma calomelanosy G. chrysophylla^ and G. sulphureay for 
comparison. 

Mr. Cooper exhibited and explained M. Dutrochet's Evi- 
dosmometer. 



APRIL 6th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., P.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Previous to the meeting Mr. D. Cooper delivered the third 
and concluding lecture on Botany. 

The following Paper was read ^^ On the Ant Tree of 
Gmanay^ (Triplaris Americana). By Robert Schomburgk, 
Esq. 

Triplaris, Linn. 

Class IX. Ord. II. Ord. Nat. Polvgonejs, Juss. 

Mores dioici. Calyx basi tubulosus, pilosus. Flares Masc, Ca- 
lyx limbo 6-partitus. Corolla 0. Stamina 9. Flores Fern, 
Calyx 3-partitus. Corolla 3-petala. Ovarium d-quetrum. 
Styli trea. Akenium 3-quetrum, calyce aucto tectum. 
r. Americana, foliis altemis, integerrimis, oblongis, acutis, nervo- 
818 ; stipulis lanceolatis laceris, spicis terminalibus axiUaribusque 
brachials. 

Triplaris Americana, Linn, Sp. PL p. 130. Auhl. Guian, ii. p. 
915. t. 347. — ^T. Pyramidalis, Jacq. Amer. 13. t. 173. f. 5. 

A TREE from fifty to sixty feet in height ; its trunk smooth, 
of a greyish colour ; the branches erect, frequently in the 
form of a pyramid ; leaves entire, oblong and narrow, from 
nine to twelve inches long, of a dark green colour ; petiole di- 
lated at the base, somewhat amplexicaule, with ochreate sti- 
pulae, and marks at the opposite direction, as of fallen-off pe- 



f BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 63 

tioles ; flowers unisexual. Males : calyx hairy^ tubular, sur* 
. rounded by a laciniated bractea, six-parted ; corolla absent ; 
stamens nine, divided in three parcels of different sizes, the 
large ones opposite the segments of the calyx, filaments 
somewhat crooked ; anthers ovate, two-celled, dehiscing 
lengthwise. Females : calyx provided with the bractea, three- 
parted ; petals three, lanceolate ; ovarium superior ; styles or 
stigmas three ; akenia triangular, protected by the calyx ; 
seed farinaceous. 

Dr. Lindley, in his Natural System of Botany, in speaking 
of the geographical distribution of PolygonecSy observes, 
*^ There are few parts of the world that do not acknowledge 
the presence of plants of this order. In Europe, Africa, 
North America, and Asia, they fill the ditches, hedges, and 
waste grounds, in the form of Docks and Persicarias ; the 
fields, mountains, and heaths, as Sorrels and training and 
twining Polygonums ; in South America and the West In- 
dies they take the form of Coccolabas or sea-side grapes ; in 
the Levant of Rhubarbs ; and even in the desolate regions of 
the North Pole they are found in the shape of Oxyria.^^ 

The object of my description adds another instance to illus- 
trate these remarks ; the Triplaris^ which 'pronounces, in its 
habits of growth, leaves, stipulae, its triangular nut protected 
by the calyx, the farinaceous albumen, &c. its relationship to 
that tribe, extends firom Columbia to the verge of BraziPs 
western boundaiy. The sandy banks of the inland rivers of 
Guiana are peopled with them ; and when shrubs, stunted in 
growth by the poverty of the soil, scarcely reach the height 
of five or six feet, the Triplaris overtops them forty or fifty 
feet. The trunk is slender and grows up straight, and it» 
erect branches form a pyramid. As already observed, it is 
unisexual, and the flowers of both sexes are insignificant : 
those of the male last only for a few days, when they dry up ; 
this is likewise the case with the petals of the females : the 
segments of the calyx however continue to grow, changing 
in their growth from green to white and vermilion, and be- 
come so attenuated that the branched nerves are easily per- 
ceptible. In that state they are' three times as large as the 
fruit, which is still protected by the tube of the calyx, and 
the whole might in appearance be resembled to a shuttlecock. 
The lisps are dense, and the tree presents now a most elegant 
appearance. One unacquainted with the contrary, would 
consider the tree covered with white blossoms, tinged with 
red, among which the dark green leaves have only occasion- 



64 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

ally room to make themselves visible. The uncautious bota- 
nist, who, allured by the deceptive appearance, should ap- 
proach the tree to pluck the blossoms, would bitterly rue his 
attempt. The trunk and branches of the tree are hollow, 
like those of the trumpet tree {Cecropia)^ and provided be- 
tween space and space with partitions, which answer to the 
position of the leaves on the outside. 

These hollows are inhabited by a light brownish ant, about 
two or three tenths of an inch long, which inflicts the most 
painful bites. Its antennae are placed near the middle of the 
anterior portion of the head ; mandibles triangular ; peduncle 
of the abdomen with two rings ; the anus hairy and provided 
with a sting or piercer {Myrmica, Latr., nova species). They 
fall upon their prey with the greatest virulence, and insert 
their mandibles almost instantly, as soon as they come in 
contact with any soft substance, emitting a whitish fluid ; 
their bite causes swelling and itching for several days. If 
they find themselves captured, they attack and kill one ano- 
ther like the scorpions. 

The Arawak Indians call the tree Jacuna, and the ant Ja- 
cuna sae ; the Warrows, Epouahari, the literal translation 
being Ant tree ; the Caribis, Itassi ; the colonists, from its 
growth, *' long John.*^ 

The presence of the scarious stipulae, in the form of an 
ochrea, is sufficient to determine the natural order to which 
Triplaris belongs ; other evidences, namely, the formation of 
its leaves, its organs of fructification, and particularly the 
erect ovulum and the superior radicle, put its relationship to 
PolyffonecB beyond doubt. It resembles strikingly the Cocco- 
loba in the form of its petiole^ and the manner in which it is 
attached to the stem ; we have in Coccoloba a similar mark 
opposite the petiole, and those asperities which are to be 
found below the latter organ are likewise observable in 7W- 
plaris. In Coccoloba the calyx swells and forms a juicy 
berry, in Triplaris it becomes three times as large as the nut. 
In its hollow trunk and branches, and the septums of the 
latter; in the division of the sexes, it resembles Cecropia; 
but to these affinities in appearance but little importance can 
be attached. 

Triplaris has received hitherto a very meagre description. 
Jacquin gives the representation of its fruit, and Aublet a 
branch ; it is however evident that the flowers of the ma1/& 
were described from those of the female flower : the bractea, 
present in both, has been completely passed over ; the calyx 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 65 

of the male is stated to be three-parted, while it is six-parted ; 
and the pubescence, which is present in the calyx of both 
sexes, has been also omitted ; the bractea is likewise covered 
with hair. 

Explanation of Plate 2. 

Fig. 1. Female Flowers of IViplaris Americana. 

2. Male Flowers. 

3. Male Flower magnified. 

4. Calyx cut open to show the position of the Stamens. 

5. Anther. 

6. Female Flower. 

7. ditto cut open and greatly magnified, 

8. Seed vessel with etdarged Calyx. 

9. Nut cut transversely. 

River Quitaro, Lat. 2*^ SO* N., November 1837. 

A specimen of the leaf of Victoria Regina was exhibited, 
received from Mr. Schomburgk, which the Council deemed 
advisable to deposit in the Herbarium of the British Museum. 



APRIL 20th. 

Dr. ^Eneas MacIntyre, F.L.S., in the Chair. 
The following gentlemen were elected Foreign members : 



Charles A. Agardh, Lund. 

Dr. C. L. Blume. 

Adolphe Brogniart, Paris. 

August P. De Candolle^ Ge- 
neva. 

Dr. G. P. De Waldheim, 
Moscow. 

Benjamin De Lessert, Paris. 

Dr. Elias Fries, Lund. 

James W. Homemann, Co- 
penhagen. 

Alex. Baron de Humboldt, 
Berlin. 

Adrian de Jussieu, Paris. \ 



Charles G. Kunth, Berlin. 

Dr. H. F. Link, Berlin. 

Dr. C. F. De Martius, Munich^ 

C. F. B. Mirbel, Paris. 

Dr. C. G. Nees Von Esenbeck, 

Breslau. 
C. G. C. Reinwardt, Leyden. 
Dr. G. Wahlenberg, Upsal. 
Don. M. La Gasca, Madrid. 
Baron Von Ludwig, Cape of 

Good Hope. 
R. H. Schomburgk, Bri.tish 

Guiana. 



p 



66 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

The Secretary then read the following Paper from Mr. A. 
Wallis, on the Genus Myostis : — 

There are but few of our British genera, that have received 
so many additions of late years^ as that of the genus Myosotis. 
Linnseus, in his great work on Natiural History, has described 
but two species, and includes under them one or two varieties, 
which have since been established as species. The two indi- 
viduals which he has admitted into his work, are M. paltistris 
and M. arvensis, these then may be taken as types of the 
genus, — the other species possessing a claim to that name 
only, from some slight variations in their respective charac- 
ters. I propose, in this paper, to confine my remarks to three 
of the newly-admitted species, viz. M. sylvatica^ M, versi- 
coloTy §• M, coUina, and I do so with some degree of re- 
luctance, when I consider that they have been pronounced as 
specifically distinct, by some of the ablest and most ex- 
perienced Botanists in the land. But as objects in nature 
are at all times open to enquiry, I have deemed it not alto- 
gether presumptuous to state my individual views on this 
subject, conceiving that the observations of the many, will 
more effectually tend to ehcit truth, than when made only by 
one or two. 

If then, we take M. arvensis as a type of the genus, we 
are led to consider what are the distinctive characters which 
separate the before-mentioned species from it. The M. ar- 
vensis wexaosi usually find in corn-fields, or other highly 
cultivated land, where it sometimes reaches a considerable 
height. Now, the M. sylvatica is mostly found in shady 
places, where it assumes a stouter form than arvensis; 
the bristles of the stem are shorter, and the leaves will 
generally be found larger than those of M^ arvensis. But 
would not the difference of soil and situation account for the 
more luxuriant growth of the one than of the other ? There 
is another distinction, also, for which neither soil nor locality 
would account ; it is that the calyx of M. sylvatica^ is more 
deeply cleft^then arvensis, and the tube of the corolla is longer 
in the former than in the latter ; but I have been disposed 
to doubt, whether these are sufficient to justify a specific 
distinction, and the more particularly so, when we recollect 
that many plants are subject to slight variations in their struc- 
tural minutiae. Again, . the M, collina is established as a 
species by modern Botanists ; and, indeed, on comparing.it 
at first sight with M, versicolor, one would scarcely presume 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 67 

to doubt the accuracy of the distinction. But if we examine 
them closely^ both as regards their comparative structure, 
also in relation to their places of growth, the first apparent 
difference will considerably vanish. The situation in which 
I have invariably found M. coUina, is on high and arid banks, 
formed of a light shingle ; and as this soil is less calculated 
to produce a radiation of heat than many others, the plant is 
generally forced into bloom by April, — ^much earlier than the 
rest of the genus. As the summer advances, however, the 
moisture of the bank becomes absorbed, and the plant 
speedily dies. This individual, when growing in these situa^ 
tions, seldom attains a greater height than two inches ; its 
general appearance is very compact, and the leaves densely 
crowded. Its beautifully minute and modest flowers, form 
a most interesting object in the early part of the spring ; 
they will sometimes be found to grow so abundantly, that 
the bank is covered with their bright cerulean petals ; and 
the somewhat broad and thickly matted leaves with which 
the ground is covered, tend to constitute a tout ensemble 
which every true lover of nature must admire. This is, 
indeed, one of those plants which may be said to be ^^ simplex 
munditUs/' as its minuteness and symmetry, (if I may use 
the term) give it the elegance for which it is noted. 

As respects the M, versicolor, it must be admitted that 
its habit varies considerably from the last-named species ; as 
instead of the stunted and bushy growth which characterises 
jftf. collinay it assumes an erect form, and the pedicels have 
more of the divergence which is to be seen in the former 
species. I have most usually found this plant on moist 
clayey banks ; sometimes attaining a height of six or eight 
inches, with numerous small branches issuing from the root 
and stem. The leaves, also, are proportionably narrower 
than those of M. coUinay a consequence, I presume, arising 
from its more elongated form. In other respects, I can 
observe no striking difference between the two ; in both we 
find the uncinated bristles mentioned by Borrer ; and both 
will be found to accord, as regards the smoothness of the 
fruit, and the concave limb of the corolla. Again, a marked 
distinction has been assigned to M. versicolor, from its 
uppermost flowers being of a light buff colour, while those 
which were more fully developed were blue ; this would cer- 
tainly seem rather conclusive ; but, having minutely noticed 
the genus during the summer of 1837, I found it was not 
uncommon for M. collina to have its uppermost florets tinged 

F 2 



68 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

the same hue as those of its nearest ally {M. versicolor). 
This fact appears not to have been before observed. 

Such, then, being the uniformity of character, which 
appears to me to exist in the individuals in question, I am led 
to consider that the apparent distinction between them, arises 
solely from their respective peculiarities of soil and situation. 
The one puts forth its early blossoms in a soil which is loose 
and arid, and thus affording no sustenance for a more perfect 
development, while the other is found in deep and cohesive 
loam, capable of retaining moisture throughout the summer, 
and from which a greater portion of nourishment can be 
obtained. 

Admitting, then, that a difference of soil operates so power- 
Ailly in producing such varied, and perhaps permanent 
distinctions of character, it will become a subject worthy of 
attention, how this peculiar operation takes place ; and 
whether, by close observation on the soil, as well as locality, 
we may not be able to establish geological laws. 



MAY 4th. 



W. H. White, Esq., in the Chair. 

A communication was read from the Chairman, being a 
translation of a paper read before the Academy at Brussels, 
by Professor Kickx, entitled " A note on the Hybridity of 
FernsP 

M. Kickx presented the following observations to the 
Royal Academy at Brussels, at their sitting in February 1837, 
and which is published in the Bulletin of the Royal Academy 
for March. 

^' I have a few observations to add to those which M. Mar- 
tens has laid before you, on a case of Hybridity in Ferns. 
My observations are as follows, viz :— r 

^^ 1st. That I have witnessed the spontaneous crossings of 
the Gymrwgramma chrysophylla and calomelanos cultivated 
in our greenhouse. 

*' 2nd. That the seeds of the Hyhrida, collected by M. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 69 

Denkalaar^ gardener to the University of Gand^ offers a 
solution of a doubly interesting question : First, to decide 
whether the produce of the Hybrid will be fruitful, and 
Secondly, to show, in such case, towards which of the two 
types, maternal or paternal, it will have a tendency to return. 
We know, indeed, that the tendency to become like the seeds 
of the maternal type is, in generid the most frequent ; al- 
though, on the other hand, one may, by repeated artificial 
fecundations, bring back again certain Hybrids indifferently 
to either, 

^^ Srdly. That I have attested the same kinds of Hybrida- 
tion between two ferns of our own country : the Asplefdum- 
Ruta-muraria, and the Asplenium Germanicuniy running into 
each other in the year 1835, upon the walls of the cemetery 
at Scharbeck. 

^*The Hybrid produce tending to the Asplenium-ruta- 
muraria, by the two inferior pairs of winged leaflets, and to 
the Asplenium Germanicum by the form of the pinnules of 
those leaflets, which, instead of being (as in the A. ruta- 
muraria) oblong rhomboidal, obtuse, and irregularly denti- 
culated, were, on the contrary, contracted at their base, and 
simply dentated at the summit. 

*^ These remarks are given to support those of Mr. Martens, 
which I had intended to lay before the Academy in a more 
detailed form, if I had not been preceded by our honourable 
colleague.*' 

The reading of this communication confirming the views 
entertained by M. Martens, led to a long, and interesting dis- 
cussion, in which several Members expressed their doubts as 
to the Hybridity above mentioned. 



JUNE 1st. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

The usual business of the evening having been dismissed, 
the Secretary proceeded to read a letter of thanks firom the 
British Museum, for the specimen of the leaf of Victoria Re- 
gina which the Council thought advisable to deposit in the 
Botanical department of that institution, and which had 
been transmitted to the Society by Mr. R. Schomburgk, now 
travelling in British Guiana. 



70 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

Mr. Dennes then read a Memoir on Polygonum OwenU, 
which on account of its interest he had translated from the 
^^Annales des Sciences Naturelles/* The Secretary also 
communicated ^^ Notes on Lythrum SalicariaJ' In this 
communication Mr. Dennes alluded to the varieties of 
this plant mentioned by Withering; and stated that he 
had observed specimens collected near the metropolis, having 
the leaves altematey opposite, and three in a whorl. The 
plant is usually described as having opposite leaves, at least 
by Hooker. Mr. D. proposed that they should be consi- 
dered as distinct varieties, and named them as follows : — 

Lythrum Salicaria. 

1. q altemifolia, 

2. /3 verticillata. 

Mr. Daniel Cooper exhibited and offered for distribution 
to the members several of the rarer plants found about Rei- 
gate, Surrey, which he had that day expressly collected for 
the purpose : and stated that it was the intention of sever^ 
of the members to collect in a similar way the rarer plants of 
the vicinity of London, and exhibit them at the monthly 
nights of meeting throughout the summer. Mr. C. called 
the attention of the members to specimens of Paris Quadri^ 
folittf of which there were plants on the table having from 
three to seven leaves, but in no instance had he observed 
more than five portions of the calyx, and not, as recorded by 
some authors, a division of the calyx for each leaf found 
upon the stem. Mr. Gray noticed a peculiarity in the flower 
of Adoxa Moschatellina, and expressed his approbation of 
the plan of procuring living specimens of the rarer species 
for distribution at the summer monthly meetings, as it would 
enable many of the members to examine and make such ob- 
servations upon the plants as they might think necessary, 
and who might be prevented from collecting them at the 
proper period. Among Mr. C.^s collection were specimens of 
the early Orchideous plants from the Chalk range of Surrey 
Hills about Reigate, comprising Ophrys apifera, O. musct- 
feray Orchis ustvlata, Platanthera bifolia, Listera ovata. Ace- 
ras anthropophora, ^c. Specimens of Leucojum jEstivum 
were also exhibited by the Secretary, which were obtained 
from the old station in Greenwich marshes, opposite Black- 
wall. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 7l 



JULY 6th. 

J. E. Orat^ Esq.^ F.R.S.^ President, in the Chair. 

The following Paper (accompanied by Drawings) was 
read ^^ On Bertholletia exceUa/^ by R. H. Schomburgk, 
Esq. 

Bertholletia excelsa. — Humb. andBonpI. PL iEq. 
CI. xiii. Ord. i. Ord. Nat. LECTTHiDEiS, — Richard. 

Fnictus Globosns, drupaceus, Isevissimus, quadrilocularis, non 
dehiscens ; loculis 6 — 8, spermis ; dissepimentis ,in fructu ma- 
turo obliteratis ; columella centrali libera, sarcocarpio crasso ; 
endocaxpio duro, externa sulcis ramosis notato, evalvi. Se- 
mina aubreniforma-triquetra, rugo'sissima, columellse centrali 
affixa. 

Integumentum exterius lignosum, interius membranaseum, utnim- 
que e laminis duabus compositum. Embryo caruosus, partibus, 
omnibus invicem confemiminatis. 

Arbor altissima ; ramis altemis ; junioribus apice foliosis. Folia 
altema, magna, oblonga, intgerrima, non punctata, coricacea. 
Stipulae nullae Floras Flavi ? Fructus magni. 

Humb. et Bom'^l. 

Calix suparus bilobus daciduus petala sex calyci insarta, subsequaHa, 
discus annularis intus staminibus crabaris obsitus, bine dilia- 
tatus in ligulam mambranacaum papilloso lamallatam. Ovarium 
inferum sub 4 loculara ; ovulis axi centrali afiixis. Stylus 1, 
Stigma obtusum. Mibi. 

A tree of the first size, the trunk is straight, the bark 
deeply furrowed, and of a dark grey colour ; it reaches the 
height of ninety to one hundred feet, before it divides into 
spreading alternate branches ; the leaves are petiolated eight 
to ten inches long, alternate, oblong, coriaceous, somewhat 
wavy, the margin obsolete repand, without pellucid dots; 
petiole semiterate, canaliculate, amplexicaule, without sti- 
pulae ; from petiole to petiole of the alternate leaves extends 
a coloured streak ; flowers in racemes, terminal ; calyx supe- 



72 PROCEEDINGS OF THE . X,^. 

nor, two-leaved, the apex of the limb three-parted ; corolla 
consisting of six petals somewhat revolute, the petals slightly 
cohering at the base, imbricate in aestivation, stamens inde- 
finite, thickly inserted on a petaloid body, which, at its base 
is elongated, ends in a hood, and covers these organs. Fila- 
ments curved, anther two-celled, dehiscence lengthways ; 
ovarium inferior, obsolete, four-celled ; ovula attached to a 
central axis ; stigma simple obtuse. Fruit globose, fifteen to 
eighteen inches in' circumference. The epicarpium is ru- 
gose ; the mesocarpium which is fleshy in its unripe state, 
changes into fibres, resembling those of the cocoa-nut, 
(Mesoc. fungoso-fibrosum) ; the endocarpium or putamen, is 
slightly umbonate. The locuments which the green fruit 
possess are only thin membranous bodies, scarcely to be 
recognised when it has come to maturity ; the nuts are placed 
around the quadrangular spumaphorum in four rows one 
over the other; there are generally from twenty to twenty- 
four nuts, seldom more, — they are three-cornered, rugose 
of somewhat reniform shape ; the kernel is sweet and does 
not possess the bitter aftertaste of the other Lecythidese. 
At maturity the nut falls to the ground, and the sperma- 
phorum commences to dry up ; the putamen is perforated at 
the top, and when the moisture causes the seeds to germinate, 
they burst the shell. Many are opened by monkeys, pec- 
caries, and other animals, which appear to be very fond of 
them. 

The bark is easily separable like all Lecythideae, and the 
liber is beaten by the Indians into a mass, which they use in 
lieu of tinder. They make of the shell of the nut arm-rings, 
and use it in various other ways ; the wood is bitter, soft, and 
inside generally hollow. This noble tree does not promise, 
therefore, to become useful for architecture ; the nuts are, 
however, delicious, chiefly when they have come to full 
maturity, and are a few weeks from the tree ; for my part I 
do not like them so well when quite fresh. I have met with 
the tree from 3*^ N. Lat. to the Equator, and it appears to 
thrive best in rich mountain valleys, and at the declivity of 
hills. I observed, however, none at the height of three to 
four thousand feet ; they blossom in January, and the fruit 
comes to maturity in five to six months. The Caribees call 
the fruit and tree Batouka, the Wapeshanas Minja, and the 
Macousis Impiema. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 73 



EXPLAKATION OF PlATBS 3 AND 4. 

Plate 3. Flowering branch of Bertholletia exceUa, 
Plate A. Fig. 1. Bud. 

2. Perfect flower. 

3. ditto cut longitudinally. 

4. ThePetaloid unilateral body, on which the stamens 

are fixed. 

5. Calyx with Style. 

6. Stamens (a) front view. 

(b) side view. 

7. Ovarium after the petals and Calyx have fallen off. 

8. Ovarium cut longitudinally. 

9. Fruit. 

10. Fruit cut vertically open, to show the position qf 

the seeds. 

1 1 . Fruit ; the seeds removed to show the rudiments 

of Locuments. 

12. Seed. 

13. Seed cut longitudinally. 

Curassawka lower Prupununy, Feb. 22nd, 1838. 



AUGUST 3rd. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Specimens of Polypogon Monspeltensis^ Poa distaris, P. 
procumbenSy Setaria viridis^ SfC.^ were exhibited by Dr. Bossey^ 
collected near Woolwich.. Mr. J. Anderson also exhibited 
numerous living specimens of Utricularia vulgaris and My~ 
riophyllum verticillatum^ obtained from the old locality in the 
ditch around Kew Gardens, near Richmond, Surrey, which 
were distributed. 

A communication was then read by Mr. D. Cooper, being 
some notes on a large variety of Ranunculus Flammula^ which 
he had found near Reigate, Surrey, and which approached 
near to 12. Lingua as regards its habit ; the size of the flower 
however being a sufficient character to consider it as the 
former species, although the whole character of the her- 



74 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

bage resembled much the latter species ; the stem varying 
from ten to nineteen inches in height, and the leaves of con- 
siderable size. Mr. C. also observed that the variety of R. 
Flammula /3 reptans Lightfoot, was exceedingly plentiful on 
Hampstead and other Heaths near London. 

The following Paper was also read, being *^ Details of the 
First Excursion made this Summer by the Members of the 
Botanical Society of London : with Observations on varieties 
of Plants.'^ By Daniel Coopeb, Esq., A.L.S., Curator to 
the Society. 

The first excursion made by the members of this Society 
was to a spot situated about twenty-five miles from London, 
called Woking. This spot was chosen on account of the easy 
access by the London and Southampton railway. Upon alight- 
ing at the station at Woking Common, Surrey, and proceeding 
to the right of the carriage-road leading to Guildford, on to 
the common, great abundance of Ulex nanus, Carex (Ederi, 
Aira caryophyllea and Aira precox were observed. One of 
the party discovered a single specimen of Teesdalia nudicaulis, 
which appeared to be very scarce in this locality, as no other 
specimen was noticed by any other individual. 

Passing beneath the archway of the railroad, (the railroad 
dividing the common into two parts,) and turning a short 
distance to the left, on the borders of small water-courses 
Lycopodium clavatum and L/yc. Selago are to be sparingly 
found ; the latter species being exceedingly unfrequent in the 
neighbourhood of London, never having before met with it. 
It would be as well to state that it was not in fructification, 
while the other species also. Lye. clavatum, was in excellent 
condition. I do not see any reason ^hj Lycopodium mundatum^y 
which is so plentiful on Wimbledon and other commons 
around London, should not be fovind on Woking Common, 
as the subsoil and situation are very similar. 

In the opposite direction, towards the small wooden bridge 
that crosses the canal, a large sandy plot of ground will be 
observed, abounding in Littorella lacustris, Hypericum, elo^ 
des, Anagallis tenella, Hehsciadium inundatum, Carex stellu- 
lata, C flava, C, (Ederi, Juncus uliyinostts var, btdbosuSj 
Juncus btfonius, Eleocharis paltAstris and caspitosuy Banun- 
cuius Flammula var. reptans, and Sdrpus fluitans. In dry 
sandy ground Blechwum boreale^ On the slopes of the canal 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 7^ 

near the wooden bridge, Ervmn Mrsutumy and the variety /3 
of Luzula campestris, called Luz. congeBta, (from the flowers 
being capitate, and the capituli being collected into an orbi- 
cular sessile head) were noticed. This is the Luciola eongesta 
of ^ English Botany/ plate 2718. In the canal MyriophyUum 
spicatumy RanunctUus agtuitiHs and Potamogeton densum were 
observed. I have no doubt that in the months of July and 
August this locality offers an extensive field for the practical 
botanist* 

I must not however leave this locality without noticing a 
variety of the Calluna vulgaris altogether new to me, although 
mentioned by the older writers to occur occasionally on ti^e 
heaths and commons in various parts of the country: — I 
allude to the /3 Erica vulgaris of Gerarde, 1380, and men- 
tioned in Ray's ^ Synopsis Stirpium Britannicarum,' p. 471, 
as follows : — 

" Myricse folio hirsute, Carolus Bauhin, 485. Myricee folio to- 
mentosiB et incanis foliis Clusii, Johamies Bauhin, 1, 355. Vulgaris 
hirsutior. Parkinson, 1480. Common rough-leaved heath. Cum 
priore, a qua certe non puto specie differe (Doodio vero Synopsis ed. 
2, Appendix, 345), diversa fuit visa, propterea praecipue quia per 
totum erieetum Bagshot ut et Redhill, per 6 aut 8 milliarum iter, vix 
alia occurat Erica. Eaque Chamsecyparissum canitie eemidetur." 

Again, in Ray^s ^ Catalogus Plantarum Angliae,' 2nd ed., 
published in 1677^ he further adds: — 

" LfOcis incultis supra Windesoram invenit Clusius. Quin et pas- 
sim occurrit non minus frequens quam vulgaris glabra, a qua, nostra 
sententia, non differt specific, cum ei praeter hirsutiem per omnia 
similis sit : nam glabra quoque alibi elatior est, alibi humilior et 
nunc dilutiore nunc saturatiore, ac proinde notae illse Clusii nihil 
valent." 

Smith, in his ^ English Flora,^ vol. ii. p. 225, mentions the 
Erica vulgaris hirsutOy Ray^s Synopsis ; Erica ciliariSy Hud- 
son, ed. 1, 144, not of Linnaeus. 

From these observations of the older botanists it appears 
that the variety Calluna vulgaris hirsutay or as they term it. 
Erica vulgaris hirsutay was known to them ; and fi'om the 
description given in the two works of Ray, corresponds ex- 
actly to the variety in question. But although this variety 
is mentioned as far back as the year 1677? y^ it has not 
found a place in any of the recently published Floras. In 
Macgillevray^s edition of Withering's Botany, pubUshed in 
1833, there is no mention of it. Dr. Macreight, in his ' Ma- 
nual of British Botany,' published in 1837^ does not notice 
it. Nor does Dr. Lindley, in his ^ Synopsis of the British 



76 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

Flora/ Dr. Hooker, however, in his 'British Flora,^ 3rd 
ed., p. 181, mentions var, /3, Smith, as being hairy ydjiA. states 
that it is the Erica ciliaris of Hudson, not of Linnaeus. This 
extreme degree of hairiness is, I think, a sufficient character 
to warrant its introduction into the other British Floras, as 
the Calluna vulgaris^ var. |3, hirsuta, (Gerarde). 

Proceeding by the carriage-road to Guildford, Littorella 
lacustris was also observed on the right, in low marshy spots 
by the wayside, near to the village of Stoke ; together with 
Huttonia palustris^ in a ditch by the road. Between Stoke 
and Merrow, shortly after leaving the former place, on the 
left is a barren piece of land, upon which was found Trigo- 
nella omithopodioides ; and on the right, a large marshy plot 
of ground, covered to the extent of two acres or more with 
Littorella lacustris, both in and out of the water. 

Taking the path to the left, which leads to a large park, 
through which passes the river Wey, Cardamine hirsuta, 
Ervum hirsutumy and Erv. tetraspermum were observed. — In 
the meadows, one' specimen of Orchis Morio was found, with 
delicate fawn-coloured flowers, a state in which I had never 
before observed that plant. There were numerous specimens 
in the ordinary state, but only one with the fawn-coloured 
flowers. I cannot find this variety mentioned in any of our 
British Floras; I therefore conclude that it is exceedingly 
rare, as it would undoubtedly be recorded, if it Were only for 
its extremely delicate colour. Numbers of the Orchis mas- 
cula were also found interspersed with it, as was also a white 
variety of Ajuga reptans. 

The only remaining plant to be noticed is the Hypscyamus 
niger, three specimens of which were found nearer to Guild- 
ford. 



SEPTEMBER 7th. 
Charles Johnson, Esq., V. P., in the Chair. 

The following Paper was read " On a principle of fencing, 
formed according to the laws of Vegetable Physiology y^^ 
with observations and remarks by Daniel Cooper, A.L.S. 
Curator. 

During a short visit at Brentwood, Essex, I was solicited 
by Mr. Breese, of the Nursery of that place, to inspect a 
fence he had constructed, which was termed by him a 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 77 

^^ Natural living Fence^^ an appellation which it well deserved. 
It consists simply of planting for the purpose trees or shoots 
of the same species^ or species of the same genus^ or genera 
of the same natural family^ and causing them to unite by 
means of the process of ^^ grafting by approach or inarch- 
ingy^ a process well understood by gardeners and Horticul- 
turists. The fact having been briefly stated^ it is necessary 
in the next place, to enter more fully into an explanation of 
the plan to be adopted. In the first instance it is requisite 
to cultivate a portion of land, for the purpose of rearing the 
shoots intended for forming the fence. Those which I had 
the opportunity of observing (on the estate of Sir Thomas 
Neave^s, Dagnam Park, Essex, constructed by his gardener 
and planter Mr. Breese), were formed of ash, but of course 
any other tree would similarly unite and answer the end 
required. The faster the tree grows, and produces new wood, 
the stronger and better the fence necessarily becomes. The 
shoots or small trees are run up, (as termed by gardeners) 
and kept trimmed so as to produce stems as straight as 
possible. These are trained to the height required, depend- 
ing upon the intended height of the fence. As soon as they 
have acquired sufficient age they are carefully transplanted, 
a trench of two feet in width being previously made in the 
line of the intended fence, it being found necessary to sur- 
round the roots with earth of a richer nature than that usu- 
ally met with, where fences are to be placed, such as the 
outskirts of woods, plantations, parks, &c. The trench 
having been made and prepared, the stems are then carefully 
removed; one set being planted at the required distance, 
a foot fof instance from each other, these we may suppose to 
slope to the north ; the other set, for example, are planted 
sloping towards the south, at the same distance from each 
other, so that when the shoots proceed from the ground, they 
are in contact by their internal part. 

The several stems having been thus arranged, the ne^t and 
most important step is that of causing them to unite ; this of ^ 
course is requisite in order to produce strength, and is ac- 
complished by the process of grafting by approachy or what 
is the same thing, that of inarching. For this purpose it is 
necessary to remove a small plate of bark at the proper 
season, on each stem where their inner portions are in con- 
tact ; this having been carefully performed, approximate the 
two stems, so that the denuded portions of each shall exactly 
meet ; tie the stems together at these places, and keep them 



78 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

for a short time from the action of the atmosphere by means 
of a piece of clay. In the course of a few weeks^ if these pre- 
cautions have been attended to, adhesion takes place, and the 
result is, that a natural living fence has been formed, having 
openings of a diamond shape, which may be made of course 
of any size that may be required ; it being only requisite to 
place the stems in the earth at a greater or less distance from 
each other. 

The adhesion takes place in the following manner according 
to the laws of Vegetable Physiology. The plates of bark 
being removed on each stem, and the stems approximated to 
each other at that part, it follows, that as the fluids rise in 
the stems of exogenous trees, within the woody portion of the 
trunk and descend within the bark, — that the stems being 
closely tied to each other, and kept at their point of union 
from the action of the air, the Cambium exudes, forms new 
wood, and the stems unite by the natural process. 

The advantages which I consider this kind of fencing to 
possess over that in ordinary use are the following : — 

1st. That it is rustic, and has not the hard and stiff ap- 
pearance of the fencing made by carpenters. 

2nd. That so long as the trees of which it is formed are 
alive, it never requires to be in any way repaired, as living 
wood resists the action of the weather. The young shoots, 
should any spring forth, to be removed by the pruning knife. 

3rd. That it may be carried to any height without addi- 
tional expense, by training or running up the stems to the 
required height. 

4th. That it acquires strength and thickness by the de- 
position of new wood annually ; so, that in the course of 
years, when the stems have acquired the greatest degree of 
thickness, and have obliterated the openings, in the first in- 
stance made, a complete solid living wooden wall will be 
the result. 

5th. That owing to the well known durability and power 
of resisting the action of the weather of the bark, and ex^ 
temal portions of living trees, a fence made on this plan does 
not require to be covered with tar, or any other preparations 
requiring much time, labour, expense, and annoyance in the 
operation. 

6th. That the first expense is the last, and is much 
cheaper also, in the first instance, than the ordinary kind of 
fencing employed, not requiring an annual expenditure to 
keep it in order ; living wood, as before observed, withstand- 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDOX. 7^ 

ing the effects of the weather to a much greater extent than 
dead wood. 

7th. That a fence to orchards may be formed of fruit trees 
of the same genus^ or genera in the same natural family ; the 
lower portions or stems of which form the fence, (and may be 
carried as before observed, to the requisite height) whilst the 
upper part may be allowed to send forth its shoots and bear 
fruit. 

8th. That owing to the open nature of this kind of fence, 
(which openings may be formed of any size) shrubs and 
other plants usually planted close up to fencework, for the 
purpose of concealing it, will receive a larger proportion of 
air and light so necessary to the growth of vegetables, which 
cannot be the case with the ordinary method of enclosing 
parks, &c., with palings. 

9th. That should one of the bars by any cause become 
dead or destroyed, the circulation is carried on by the con* 
tiguouB bar or stem ; so, that if a bar dies, it still remains in 
its situation, although it does not increase in thickness as 
takes place in those around it ; this dead bar may then be 
compared as to durability, to the fencing until the present 
time formed of dead wood. 

From the well known nature and structure of wood, I con- 
sider the application of the process oi grafting by approach, or 
inarching in the construction of fences of all descriptions, 
to be one of the leading improvements of late years made 
in the science of gardening; and as such, should strongly 
recommend it to the notice of those individuals possessing 
landed property, and also to the Directors of Railroads and 
other undertakings, where both man and cattle are intended 
to be kept off, and by the judicious selection of stems 
armed with prickles &c., a most effectual barrier would ulti- 
mately be the result. 

Mr. Cooper exhibited specimens of Polypgon Littoralis, 
found below Woolwich, Kent. Some observations were also 
made on the variety of Polygonum avicularcy called 
P. marinum of Hudson, which led to some discussion. 



OCTOBER 5th. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

Some further remarks on the advantages of the natural 
living fence described at the last meeting were made, and a 



80 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

specimen exhibited^ being a portion of the original fence con- 
structed by Mr. Breese, on the estate of Sir Thomas Neave^s, 
at Dagnam Park, Essex, The Secretary read the following 
translation from the Annales des Sciences Naturelles, vol. 8, 
'^ On the Formation of Crystals in the Cellules of Plants j^ 
by Dr. F. Unger, (translated by Mr. J. Rich). 

Some authors have wrongly maintained that the crystals 
which exist in plants are not found in the cellules them- 
selves, but only in the intercellular passages ; that which has 
possibly led them into error is that these groups of crystals 
are sometimes so voluminous as to distend the cellule and 
give it the appearance of being six times the size it is in the 
natural state. Generally these crystal cellules do not contain 
other organic substances ; nevertheless I have found them in 
the same cellule, mixed with numerous grains of chlorophylle. 
Meyen first discovered crystals in the epidermal cellules, for up 
to that time it was thought that they belonged exclusively to 
those of the parenchyma. To the two plants, the Maranta 
zibrina and Tradescatitia discolor, which he has signalized 
as presenting this peculiarity, I can add a third, the Goody era 
repens. However, it is commonly in the cellules of the paren-. 
chyma that these inorganic bodies are observed. They exist 
in all the divisions of the vegetable kingdom from the most 
simple Algae (Nostoc muscorum Confera crystallifera) to the 
most perfect vegetables. It is seldom that a single crystal is 
found in a cellule, but this peculiarity is remarked in the 
Papyrus Antiquorum and the FiciLS Benffalensis ; but in gene- 
ral each cellule contains several, even in the. vegetables we 
have just named. In plants which have ethereal cavities the 
crystal cellules are often empty, and make a projection in the 
interior of these cavities ; this is particularly the case in aci- 
cular crystals, . as M. Meyen has shown in his Phytotomia. 
I have observed it also in the crystals disposed in stars of the 
Myriophyllum spicatum. The existence of crystals appears to 
be connected with that of the cellules containing sediment^ 
and other substances, such as rosin, chlorophylle, &c. The 
vascular bundles on the contrary have nothing to do with 
the crystalline formations. Let us first occupy ourselves 
with the form of these crystals whose extreme smallness ren- 
ders it exclusively diflScult to determine, for nothing positive 
could have been said on this point if the angles that the sur- 
faces make between them had not been measured. M. Raspail 
invented for this purpose his goniometrical microscope ; 
but this instrument is very difficult to manage, so that the 
limit of his errors be less than the differences which exist 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, 81 

between the different vegetable ciystals. One may be con- 
vinced by reflecting that the largest crystals I have examined 
had 0. 11 of a line in length, a great many 0. 023, and all 
the intermediate sizes up to the infinitely small. My conclu- 
sions on this point are exactly in accordance with those of 
M. Raspail. (I have given drawings as exact as possible of 
the crystals found in the cellules of the following plants ; 
ficus bengalensis, Maranta zebrina, Musa paradisiaca, M. 
ooccinea, Lucca gloriosa, Strelitzra regina, Papyrus antique- 
rum, Tritoma Uvaria, Aloe pulchra.) In these vegetables the 
crystals are separated, or at least free in the interior of the 
cellules, but they are often grouped and balanced between 
them as is seen in the several Rheums, in the MyriophyUum 
spicatumy Hemiaria glabra, MercuriaJia perennisy Viburnum 
lantanay Cactus pendulus, Caladium nymphcB/oUum, The che- 
mical examination of these bodies offers no less di£5culty 
than the determination of their physical form. Buchner, 
Schubler, Saigey, De la Fosse, Ness d'Esenbeck, and Ras- 
pail, are the only persons who have occupied themselves 
with it; their bases are lime, magnesia, and sometimes, 
though seldom, silex. The carbonic, oxalic, phosphoric, and 
tartaric acids, are combined with them. The method I 
have adopted differs from that of Raspail ; I left the crys- 
talliferous tissue to concoct in weakened nitric acid, filtered 
it, and then treated it with ammonia, I gathered the white 
precipitate, which then formed itself, and warmed it upon 
a plate of platina. The effervescence proved to me the ex- 
istence of vegetable add, which must be either tartaric or 
oxalic. The author adds in a casual manner some observa- 
tions on the vessels of the latea^ in conformity with a plate 
which accompanies his paper. This is the substance of it. 
These vessels described by Schultz and Meyen are quite dif- 
ferent to the vasa propria, as M. Mohl has proved ; they 
contained a more mucilaginous juice, with a resinous or gum 
substance. The proper vessels form a part, thus to speak, 
of the vascular bundles, and probably perform a part in the 
transfer of the juices. The vessels of the latex, on the con- 
trary, never accompany the other vascular bundles. They 
are constantly separated by cellular tissue, and develop them- 
selves by anastomosiny with several cellules placed end to 
end. They appeared to me to belong to the cellular rather 
than the vascular system. In one of the figures the author 
has represented these newly formed vessels, such as those he 
had observed in the pith of the Ficus bengalensis ; these are 

G 



82 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

quadrilateral cellules placed end to end ; they do not difier 
from the other parenchymacal cellules, if it is not in their 
tontaining already a great number of these round granules, 
which form the greater part of the latex. This mode of for- 
mation is in harmony with what we observe in other organs, 
such as the spiral vessels, which are nothing but anartomosed 
cellules placed end to end. However, M. Unger has never 
been able to prove the movement of the latea^^ and he pur- 
poses recurring to the subject at a future time. 

Mr. Wm. Baxter of Oxford forwarded a specimen of Ma- 
tricaria Chamomilla (of which he found only a solitary plant 
in Cowley field near Oxford, on the 12th July, 1838,) differ- 
ing from the common state of the species in the florets of the 
ray being very short and rather fewer than in the common 
one. Mr. Baxter stated that he had never observed it in 
that state before, neither could he find it noticed in any of 
the Floras. The same gentleman also forwarded forty-four 
species of British willows which were obtained from speci- 
mens sent to the Oxford Botanic Garden about three years 
since by Mr. Borrer, and kindly promised to augment the 
number the first opportunity. 



NOVEMBER 2nd. 

J. E. Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President, in the Chair. 

The Secretary read the following remarks from a Member 
of the Society, on a ^^ Botanical Excursion to Cobham and 
CuxtoUj Kentp in company with several Members. 

The very general and indefinite manner in which our 
Florae refer to the localities producing the plants they des- 
cribe, has rendered a more particular and exact directory ne- 
cessary for the purposes of the practical student, whose 
object is not merely to amass a certain number of species, 
but also personally to visit and investigate the locality in 
which each is produced, in order that he may observe the re- 
lation subsisting between its vegetable productions, its geolo- 
gical character and its geographical position, and thus be 
enabled to deduce inferences respecting the natural distribu- 
tion and artificial culture of plants. Such directories some 
of our local Florae and Botanical Guides profess to be, but 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 83 

every one present, who like myself has often spent hours in 
the unsuccessful search after plants whose place of growth is 
described in some such general terms as " Tonbridge Wells/* 
^^ about Dartford*' or " between Cobham and Cuxton/' will 
at once admit, that with reference to those plants which occur 
only in one or two localities, even these directories are by 
no means sufficiently precise and exact. 

And I would ask, why is not the habitat of a plant 
pointed out with as much precision as the position of a rock ? 
and why is not the former discovered by the Botanist as 
readily as the latter is avoided by the navigator. It is simply 
because the Botanist has hitherto been contented with a 
mere verbal description of the locality to which he referred, 
while the mariner has by means of the compass laid down on 
his chart, the exact relation of the spot he describes to some 
of the known objects by which it is surrounded, and by 
which it may certainly be recognized by subsequent observers. 

These remarks on the imperfect methods at present em- 
ployed by Botanists to point out the stations at which parti- 
cular plants are produced, were suggested to me by the diffi- 
culty we experienced in discovering the Althaea hirsuta and 
Salvia pratensis in our late excursions to Cobham, and I 
have been induced to contrast their inaccuracy with that of 
the mariner, in order more clearly to point out the advantages 
which would result from making the compass the companion 
of the vasculum, and to justify me in suggesting that in all 
our future attempts to describe localities we should carefully 
select two of the more conspicuous objects in the neigbour- 
hood, and accurately note their relation (as ascertained by 
the magnetic needle) to the spot described. 

By the adoption of this means not only may a church or a 
castle, a windmill or a barn, a mountain point, a water stream, 
or line of road, be made an almost infallible guide to a fertile 
spot which it might cost the inquirer hours to discover ; but 
the limits over which some of the more strictly local plants 
are now diffiised being thus accurately noted, their further 
extension may hereafter be observed, and possibly our know- 
ledge of the laws which regulate the dispersion of plants may 
thus be increased. 

Having made these remarks on the advantages which 
would result to Botanists from a more frequent use of the 
compass, I proceed now to the proper object of this narra- 
tive, which is to place on record among the papers of this 
Society a brief memorandum of the place of growth of some 

G 2 



84 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

of the more rare and interesting plants observed during the 
two excursions to Cobham, which have been made by myself 
in company with other members of this Society during the 
present year. On the first of these excursions I proceeded 
from Woolwich by way of Plumstead-Common, Welling, 
Bexley, Crayford, Dartford Heath, Wilmington, Sutton at 
Hone, Darent, Stone and Northfleet ; and on the second, 
when I had the pleasure of being accompanied throughout 
by our Curator, our route was by way of Plumstead Marshes, 
Wickham, Welling, Dartford, Darent, Longfield Hill, and 
Merstead to Cobham. Having promised this general view of 
our course on each of these excursions, I shall now commence 
the enumeration of the several species which deserve parti- 
cular notice. 

Polypogon Manspeliensis. We found this rare and beauti- 
ful grass growing abundantly on the banks of ditches, and. 
in boggy places in the Marshes East of Woolwich, particu- 
larly in front (i. e.) south of the Butt or Mound in the Plum- 
stead Practice-ground. 

Polypogon littoralis. ^^ Near the Magazine, four miles below 
Woolwich,*' has often been referred to as one of the few places 
producing this species, and Sowerby has figured a specimen 
from that locality ; I have, however, often searched for it 
there in vain, and was therefore greatly delighted at finding 
it associated with the former species in the bay, immediately 
in front of the Butt to which I have before alluded. 

On ditch banks forming the East border of the Practice- 
ground, we observed Poa distanSy procumbens and maritima, 
and in the water Zannichellia palttstrisy Potamogeton pectina- 
turn and Scripus lacustria with the Polygormm maritimum of 
Ray, described at our last meeting. 

At a considerable distance from this marsh, about the 
middle of the Sandy Hill leading from Woolwich to Plumstead 
Common, we found in the hedge-banks on the left a small 
plot of Erysimum CheiranthoideSf a plant whose foliage and 
flowers rival each other in elegance. 

Passing over Plumstead Common to a road called the 
King's High-way, I found in a little wood on the right of 
this road the Orobus tenuifolms of Bjoth. This plant which 
Wildenow, Smith, and Hooker, agree in regarding as a nar- 
row-leaved variety of Orobus tuberosus^ is considered by Don 
and others as a distinct species. The following characters 
which are permanent in cultivated plants are given by Mr. D. 
Don in the 3rd vol. of the Memoirs of the Wemerian Society, 
and sufficiently distinguish this from the common species. 



J 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, 85 

O. tuberosus Roth. FJor. Germ. 1-305. Foliis impaii-pin- 
natiR, pinnis anguste linearibus supra canaliculatis^ apice 
muscronatis ; stipulis laDceolatis mucronatis posticibus biden- 
tatis^ racemis paucifloris. 

Radix tuberosa, caules decumbentes debiles angulati an- 
gulis alatis^ folia altema impari-pinnata, pinnis anguste line- 
aribus supra canaliculatis nervosis subtus hirsutis apice mu- 
cronatis extemi minutissimo ; stipulse semi sagittatae lanceo- 
latae mucronatae margine ciliatae, posticibus bidentatis ; 
racemi axillares pauciflori; flores lilacini^ vexillo alisque 
striatis. 

The next plant Tvhose place of growth 1 shall name^ is 
Campanula Rapunculus. This is stated in Turner and Dil- 
wyn^s Botanist's Guide^ to occur in hedges between Bexley 
and Dartford. I may add for the sake of rendering this di- 
rection a little more exact that I found it abundant on the 
border of a small wood adjoining the first field through 
which the footpath passes from Bexley Church to Dartford 
Heath. 

On Dartford Heath, Uleof nanus and Genista anglica were 
seen between the Folly House and Wilmington workhouse, 
and Bupleurum rotundifolium on the side of a lane between 
Mount Pleasant and Northhell's Farm, both near Wilming- 
ton. Passing from this lane towards Sutton Church through 
some chalky corn-fields called the Hollow Denes, I observed 
Fadia dentatay Bromus erectus and secalinus^ Agrostis Spica- 
ventiy Plantago media, Linaria minor ^ L, Elatine and L. spuria^ 
Euphorbia eangua, Cisius Helianthemum^ Adonis autumnalis 
and Ajuga Chamapitys, all of them common plants in this 
neighbourhood. 

In addition to most of these, Galium tricome, Anagallis 
caeruleay Papaver hybridum and somniferum^ were also found 
in the first corn-field to the left of the Fox and Hounds at 
Darent Lane's End, while the wood above this field afibrded 
Astragalus glycyphyllus, Asperula Cynanchica and Rubus 
casius F on its borders. Leaving this productive spot, and 
returning to the high road, we saw the white clifis of North- 
fleet varied with the red and yellow flowers of Valeriana 
rubra and Crepis biennis. The approach of night prevented 
my observing any other plants between Northfleet and Cob- 
ham ; but the following day, in company with several mem- 
bers, we found Brachypodium pinnatum and Dianthus Arma- 
ria on the side of the road leading from Cobham to the Park ; 



86 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

aod crossing the Park by the first path op the rights we en- 
tered the small copse by which this portion of it is skirtecl^ 
and about a chalk pit near the gate observed Bromus erecttia. 
Orchis conopseoy lAstera ovata, AstragaliM glycyphylluSy and 
a variety of Origanum vulgare with white flowers, and in the 
field below Papaver hybridum and somniferumy with Bttpleur- 
rum rotundifolium and Fadia dentattty while the hedge border^ 
ing this field afforded Bjosa spinosissima and Campanula TVo- 
chelium. Leaving this field and passing by the footpath 
towards Cuxton, we found in the field above the lodge near 
the style joining the high road, so much of the Brachypodium 
pinnatum that the turf was coloured of a beautiful pale green 
by its abundance, and on the bank bordering the corn-fields 
at the back of the lodge, Atropa Belladonna and Marrubium 
vulgare occurred plentifully. 

In a billy field immediately behind Brick House Farm on 
the Cuxton Road^i which has recently been converted into a 
fir plantation, we found Salvia pratensis and Rosa Rubiginosa, 
particularly at the upper part of the field about forty paces 
from the hedge bordering it on the left. All over this field 
Campantda glomerata and Chlora per/oliata were abundapt* 

Returning again towards Cuxton, we picked on our way 
one plant of Orobanche major y and on the banks of the Med- 
way saw Triticum junceumy Beta maritimay Statice Armaria 
and Limonium and Artemisia maritima in abundance. 

Following the line of road pursued in our second excur- 
sion, I may remark that in addition to many of the plants 
already named, we found on the road side between Darent 
and Longfield Hill, Artemisia Absinthium and Bupleurum 
rotundifoliumy and at Cobham, Althaea hirsuta and Salvia 
pratensis in a different spot to that formerly described. I 
shall point out the station in which these plants were des- 
cribed, and then conclude. 

*^ Near the junction of the three parishes of Cobham, Cux- 
ton, and Stroud," has long been the direction given for find- 
ing these rare plants. Its inefficiency is proved by thq 
circumstance of five individuals who were present in our 
first excursion having sought for it by this direction in vain, 
I shall therefore note the line of road by which we disco* 
vered them. Entering the Park by the gate nearest to Cob* 
ham, we passed by the road near the Mausoleum to the 
large beech tree which forms the point of junction of the 
three parishes I have named, following this road to the 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. ^7 

border of the wood^ we inclined to the right, along the upper 
end of the field to which it leads, and here in a spot directly 
North of Cuxton Church, both plants occurred in abund- 
ance. 



NOVEMBER 16th. 

J. £. Grey, Esq,, F.R.S,, President, in the Chair. 

Mr, W, M. Chatterley read the following Paper " On the 
AdvantageM qf BataniccU Statistics, iUustrated by the Order 
CmifernsJ' 

In alluding to the tribe of the Coniferae, I do not intend on 
the present occasion, to call your attention either to Botanical 
structure or affinities of the plants comprising that order ; 
indeed, were I to do so, I could but repeat the words of 
Lambert, Richard, Brongniart or Brown, to whose works 
I beg to refer you for any information on this subject ; to 
those of the latter especially, whose able scientific memoir on 
this subject, is attached as a part of the Appendix to Captain 
King's Voyage to New Holland. 

I wish only to draw the attention of the Society to the 
statistics of this tribe in particular, and to the subject of the 
general connection between the science of Botany and that of 
statistics, a connection which I am inclined to think has not 
met with that attention, which its importance would seem to 
have demanded. Surely, if it be interesting, as it cannot be 
doubted but that it is to all men of enlarged and philan- 
thropic views, to know that through their own labours, and 
the labour of their predecessors, and coadjutors a large 
amouul of benefit has accrued to society ; so it can be no 
less interesting, nay important, to attempt to appreciate, as 
far as data will permit the amount of good thence derived, 
and to calculate its progressive increase. 

This we are enabled to do though imperfectly, by reference 
to Statistical Tables ; I say imperfectly, for these Tables are 
themselves as yet imperfect, even as far as regards the com- 
mercial relations of our own country, and it is but in few 
others that their importance is acknowledged by the ruling 



83 PROCEEDINGS OF TUK 

powers. Under some governments it is thought suf&cient to 
keep an imperfect account of the births and burials of their 
subjects ; under others even this is not attended to, and it is 
impracticable. As we are thus, to a great extent excluded 
from Foreign Statistical data, we must necessarily confine our 
investigations to those of our own country. 

We have in this country a set of Statistical Tables, pre- 
pared by Mr. Porter, and presented by command of the 
government to both Houses of Parliament ; they include the 
statistics of the last seventeen years ; the first volume con- 
taining ten years, from 1821 to 1831, since when, five others 
have appeared, more perfect in their details than the first, 
and bringing the tables up to a later date, 1835 ; but as these 
are prepared for the most part from the data to be found in 
the various government offices, such as the Excise, Customs, 
and other tax offices, together with some documents prepared 
especially for this purpose by order of the government, and 
though no one can doubt but that these data are exceedingly 
numerous, yet, they are defective in many of the details, 
and certainly so in any scientific arrangement : hence it be- 
comes eminently the duty of all those whose peculiar studies 
may have fitted them for the investigations of particular 
subjects, to carry out the data thus furnished them ; as it is 
the business of the chemist to investigate the proportionate 
consumption of those articles more immediately appertain- 
ing to his science, so it should seem to be no less the duty of 
the Botanist to carry out similar investigations, with respect 
to those appertaining to the object of his own studies ; to 
the philanthropist, whatever branch of science he may 
pursue, the importance must be obvious, and further explana- 
tion useless. 

It is, however, the more incumbent on each to make these 
investigations for his own science, not only that each would 
be better qualified to give a proper scientific arrangement to 
the results, but that there is so limited a number of persons 
who confine their attention solely to statistical investigations, 
that it cannot be expected that they should be able to per- 
form the whole of the operations necessary to produce the 
most perfect results. 

The science of statistics too, is not a science difficult to be 
acquired, requiring little besides mere diligent and plodding 
labour to produce the desired results ; in this it scarcely 
difiers from any other study, though it is wanting in the 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 89 

Other pleasing accompaniments afforded by the study of 
Botany. 

I trust I have now shown^ that it is not on the statist alone 
that we should rely for satisfactorily investigating the con- 
nection between the two sciences of Botany and Statistics^ 
and their general relation to the welfare of mankind. 

The importance of the subject and the necessity for its 
pursuit by other than the mere statist, being acknowledged, 
the facilities for the investigation afforded to the Botanist, by 
the natural classification of plants, according as it does with 
their general properties, would seem immediately to direct us 
to the consideration of the statistics of each order, and to the 
grouping of the results in accordance with such natural 
arrangement ; with this view I have made the following very 
imperfect attempt with an order, exceedingly important from 
the various economical purposes to which the products of the 
various plants composing it are applied. 

The order Coniferae is divided into two sections, the Abie- 
tin* and Cupressinae : the chief of the properties which 
render this tribe so important reside in the first section, the 
Abietinae, and are chiefly confined to the genera Abies, Larix 
and Pinus in that section. 

These properties seem very simply to be divided into two 
distinct kinds, viz., 1st, those which reside in the wood as 
timber; and 2ndly, those which reside in the eliminated 
juices. 

The first consists of that kind of timber imported into this 
country under the several names of deals and deal ends, 
batten and batten ends, masts, lathwood, and fir timber. 

The deals are the trunks of the trees sawn into planks, 
varying in length from 6 feet to 45 and upwards, having a 
breadth of 7 inches, and a thickness of from 3^ in. to 4 in., 
and thus pay a duty, varying in accordance with the sizes of 
the deals, from £2 to £10 per 120, if imported from our Bri- 
tish Possessions in North America; but if imported from 
foreign countries the duties are much higher, varying from 
£8 2s. 6d. to £44 per 120. 

The deal ends are planks shorter than 6 feet, having similar 
width and thickness with the deals, and pay a less amount of 
duty per 120 than the deals. When coming from British 
North America they pay a duty of from 15s. to £1 10s. ; and 
from foreign countries from £6 to £12. The number of 
deals and deal ends imported has gradually increased from 
the year 1820 to 1835. 



90 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

The following is the amount of importation and net reve- 
nue for several of the intermediate years, viz. : 





Net Revenue. 


Qreitt Hundreds. 


£ . 


1820 .... 86.265 


405,751 


1825 (a very large amount) 77,074 


942^34 


1830 .... 56,204 


560,521 


1834 . . 67,105 


601,914 


1835 .... 61,731 


582,485 



The average importation, consumption, and revenue for the 
fifteen years from 1821 to 1835 inclusive, is as follows : 



Import. 


Consumption. 


Net Revenue. 


Gt. Hunds. 


Gt. Hunds. 


£ 


53,868 


53,440 


629,266 



But it should be observed that though the consumption is on 
the average less than the importations, still in many years it 
is much greater, and this must be attributed either to the 
working up of the old stock, or the use of home grown tim- 
ber ; although I am not sure that the imports of the latter 
are included in this estimate. The amount of exportations it 
is scarcely worth while to condder in so general a view as the 
present, it being not more than 750 gt, hunds., about I in 
every 72. 

The countries whence deals and deal ends are principally 
procured for our home consumption are our North Ame- 
rican possessions, as might be inferred from the immense 
difference in the duties on timber brought thence and that 
coming from foreign countries ; this difference has been in- 
stituted for the purpose of protecting the trade in these 
Colonies, which consists chiefly of timber; and the very 

great disproportion in the duties has been found necessary 
om the very great superiority of the Baltic timber, that is 
the timber from the north of Europe ; which superiority 
would counterbalance a very large increase of outlay in the 
first instance, hence we have an exorbitant duty laid upon 
good timber, for the purpose of forcing us to use bad timber; 
or as it is said, to protect the North American trade. It may 
be useful to compare the accounts of the importations of 
deals and deal ends for any one year from the countries bor- 



i BOTANICAL. 80CIBTY OF LONDON, 91 



dered by the Baltic Sea^ and those bordered by the St. Law- 
rence river; for instance^ the year 1833, when we imported 
from 

Gt. Hunds. 

- Russia 10,815 

Sweden ..... 2,633 

Norway 7,124 

Prussia 4,229 



Total from Countries bordered by 

the Baltic .... 24,801 

British Possessions, N. A. 30,974 

So we import bad timber some 4,000 miles at a great 
expense, while we could have a superior article from places 
less than one*fourtb of that distance ; in fact, the annual loss 
to the community has been under estimated at j£l,000,000 
sterling. 

Deals are also obtained, though in small quantities, from 
the following countries, besides those already mentioned : — 
Germany, Holland, Belgium, France, Portugal, Italy, East 
India Company^s territories and Ceylon, British West Indies, 
Isles of Guernsey, Jersey, Aldemey, and Man ; but fVom all 
these, in the same year as that above quoted, viz. 1832, the 
whole amount of deals imported was not more than 15 Great 
Hundreds. 

(To be continued.) 



NOVEMBER 29th. 

J. E« Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President^ in the Chair. 

Anniversary Meeting. 

The Secretary read the Annual Report (as appended to 
these Proceedings), which was unanimously adopted. 

After which the Society proceeded to ballot for the election 
of Officers, when the following gentlemen were declared duly 
elected:— 






92 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

John Edward Gray, Esq., F.R.S., President. 
J. Reynolds, Esq., Treasurer. \ Daniel Cooper, Esq., Curator. 

G. E. Dennes, Esq., Secretary. 

Other members of the Council — 



John Anderson, Esq., M.E.S. 

Francis Bosset, M.D. 

W. M. Chatterlet, Esq. 

J. £. Children, Esq., V.P.R.S., &c. 

Joseph Freeman, Esq. 

T. W. Greene, Esq., B.CL. F.H.S. 



Charles Johnson, Esq. 

H. A. Meeson, M.D. 

William Ord, M.D. 

D. C. Macreight, M.D. F.L.S. 

W. H. White, Esq. 



The President then appointed the two following gentle- 
men as Vice-Presidents, 

J. G. CHILDREN, Esq., V.P.R.S., &c. | Dr. D. C. MACREIGHT, F.L.S., ace. 

The following Address was then delivered by the Presi- 
dent : — 

Gentlemen, 

It may be expected that I should, on this occasion, 
make a few remarks on the progress and prospects of the 
Society, as you have done me the honour to' elect ;'^me 
a third time as your President, although I should have 
wished the choice had fallen on one who was more ac- 
tively engaged in Botany, and who could devote more of his 
time to your services; though, at the same time, allow me to 
say that there are few persons more desirous of making him- 
self useful to this and other institutions devoted to education 
in all its multifarious branches than myself. From the re- 
port read by the Secretary, I am glad to find the Society 
has been gradually and steadily increasing, the number of 
members amounting to one hundred, of which forty-two are 
resident, thirty-four corresponding and twenty-four foreign, 
vforty-seven of which have been elected since the last anni- 
versary. The Curator in his report has referred to the great 
additions which have been made to the Herbarium, ooth 
British and Foreign, during the past year ; and he informs 
me that the number of British plants received this year con- 
sists of eighteen thousand five hundred and ninety-two spe- 
cimens, containing one thousand and fifty species, four hun- 
dred and twenty-two genera, and ninety-eight natural orders. 



BOTANICAL 80CIBTY OF LONDON. 93 

The Foreign Herbarium consists of upwards of ten thousand 
specimens^ but^ as we must be all aware who know the nu- 
merous occupations of our Curator, that he has not as yet, 
from the want of time, been able to arrange and distribute 
them into their genera and families : indeed, when we con- 
sider that the Curator only holds an honorary office, and is 
engaged in his medical avocations, &c., and the time and 
great labour required to arrange and distribute the British 
plants alone, we can only thank him for his industry, and 
wait until he has more leisure to attack the Foreign Herba- 
rium, which, though not at present arranged, is rapidly in- 
creasing in extent, and will, no doubt, be eventually a very 
large and useful collection. To facilitate the arrangement of 
the British species, the Council deputed Mr. D. Cooper to 
print a list of the Natural and Linnaean Orders,* for label- 
ing collections ; and for the purpose of giving the same as- 
sistance to the members, they have caused to be printed 
several copies which may be procured at a reasonable price. 

It is with great pleasure I refer to the kind manner in 
which the Botanical Society of Edinburgh has responded to 
our invitation to open a correspondence between the two So- 
cieties, and more especially to the result of that correspond- 
ence which has been the reception of a large parcel of Bri- 
tish and Foreign plants from their stores. I hope this will 
be the commencement of a long and beneficial intercourse, 
which cannot but be mutually advantageous to the two So- 
cieties. 

While speaking of the great additions to the Herbarium, 
I cannot avoid alluding to the continued exertions made by 
our Local Secretaries resident in different parts of Britain, 
&c., and who being for the most part the best practical Bo- 
tanists in the different counties in which they reside, are ex- 
erting their endeavours to forward our views. 

Indeed, in taking a review of the proceedings of the past 
year, the pleasant and friendly meetings we have had in this 
room, the interesting papers which have been read, the dis- 
cussions which have ensued, the instructive lectures which 
were given to the members by our excellent and industrious 
Curator, and the pleasant Botanical excursions which have 
been taken by the various members of the Society, in com- 

* List of Decandolle's Natural Orders and Genera, together with the whole of 
the Linnaean Classes and Orders for labeling British Collections. Double demy 
sheet. Longman and Co. ; Machlachlan and Co. Price One Shilling. 



d4 PROOfiEDINOS OF THE 

pany with one another (judging from the delightful recollec- 
tions I have of the one I was enabled to join in)^ I cannot 
but consider that the Society has had a beneficial influence 
on the progress of Botany, by making new votaries in the 
train, and has not been deficient in social comfort^ which 
should be one of our most ardent desires. 

At the request of several of the original members of the 
Society, the Council have determined on publishing the first 
part of its Proceedings, which, they trust, will show that they 
have not altogether been in the back ground, considering 
the short time the Society has been in existence. They 
moreover trust that each individual member will subscribe 
for a copy, and will likewise use his endeavours with his 
friends to do as much as possible in helping to defray the 
expenses attendant on them ; owing to the low annual sub- 
scription and the several advantages the members receive for 
it, they are not enabled to present them gratuitously to the 
members. 

With regard to the Botanic Garden, as proposed as 
one of the objects of this Society, your Council have been 
delayed from entering into any speculations of the kind 
until they feel assured of its success, but have determined to 
proceed surely but slowly in working out that desideratum 
and have set aside all idea at present of carrying it 
into effect ; moreover, 1 find a Society is attempted to be 
established in this metropoUs under the name of the Royal 
Botanic Society, for the express purpose of forming a garden 
in the Regent^s Park, which will, I am told, be open to visit- 
ors on the same terms as the gardens of the Zoological So- 
ciety. But while wishing that Society every success, as I 
always have wished every Society that has been established 
for the spread of knowledge and pleasure among the people, 
I think it incumbent on myself to mention, that in their 
Prospectus I find they have placed my name down amongst 
the list of its ^Proposed Fellows/^ without the slightest 
authority on my part, and I am informed that the same has 
been done with one of my friends, a member of this society ; 
which is the more to be regretted, as from the expensive 
manner in wl^ch the Society appears to proceed, I have 
determined not to be in any way connected with it until it be 
firmly established. 

Having now referred to each of the heads which appear 
most important in direct communication with the Society, I 
wish to say a few words on the progress which Botany has 
made during the past year. Before so doing, it may be as 



J 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY. OF LONDON. 95 

well to state^ that there has been in the course of the year 
two works published on the subject, giving a history of 
Botanical Science during the preceding year. They are of 
very different character, each having its peculiar interest to 
the Botanical student. One by J. E. Wickstrom in the 
Transactions of the Royal Society of Stockholm, giving a 
good abstract, in systematic order, of the various works and 
papers, similar, but at greater length than in my outline 
of Progress of Botany for the year 1820, pubUshed in the 
the Annals of Philosophy for 1821 ; and the other above 
alluded to, is by Professor Meyen, appended to Professor 
Weigman's Archives. It is chiefly interesting as containing 
the theoretical views of the author. This latter is about 
to be translated into the EngUsh language by Mr. W. 
Francis. 

It is my intention only to refer to the more important 
works and papers, as otherwise, I fear I should be detaining 
you longer than would be agreeable to your patience. Com- 
mencing with the labours of our native Botanists, I may ob- 
serve that, they form a very important item in the history of 
the science, as is proved to have been the case in former 
years, by the numerous references that are made to them in 
the histories of the progress of Botany, before referred to. 

Sir. W. J. Hooker, has published a new edition of his ex- 
cellent and useful Flora^ and which he has rendered more 
serviceable by the addition of plates, illustrating the genera 
of GrmmineiS and UmbeUifertBy which are generally so diffi- 
cult for the Tyro to understand. Dr. D. C. Macreight, our 
industrious Vice-President, has also published a very useful 
manual of British Botany, in which the whole of the British 
plants, imd those ordinarily cultivated in Britain, are ar-' 
ranged according to the natural system of Decandolle, with 
excellent Analytical Tables, for the more easy making out of 
tibe species. 

Mr« William Baxter has proceeded regularly with his illus- 
trations of the genera ot British flowering pUmts, and Mr. C. 
E. Sowerby continues the republication of the English Botany 
on a cheap plan^ These two works are so well known as to 
require no comment from me. But we have had new addi- 
tions to the works, giving figures of British plants in the 
'' Ferns^' and « IMtU English Flora,'' of Mr. G, Francis^ 
works, which for the beauty and accuracy of the figures, and 
neatness of description, and cheapness, deserve the greatest 
praise. The Rev. M. J. Berkeky has, with his usual ac- 
curacy, been examining and giving some details of the more 



96 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

minute part of the organs of fructification of the Fungi^ which 
must be considered as very valuable additions to our know- 
ledge of the history of these curious^ but little known tribe 
of vegetables. 

Of the works of English Botanists on general and exotic 
Botany, I need only refer to the completion of Dr. Hooker's 
Flora of North America ; to Dr. Lindley's Monographic 
nitistrations of Orchidea; to Mr. Bateman's magnificent 
work on the Orchidea of Memco ; to Mr. Bentham's impor- 
tant labours on the Labiata and Scrophularinea ; of the 
physiology of plants, to the very interesting and philoso- 
phical papers of Mr. Griffiths on the development of the 
Ovulum, in the transactions of the Linnaean Society, and 
in the Asiatic Researches. But of the works which I 
consider of the greatest importance in this class, is the 
Descriptions of the Plants collected in Java by Dr. Horsfield, 
and published by Mr. Bennett, with observations on their 
structure and affinity, by Mr. R. Brown, which, to use the 
words of a celebrated Practical Botanist, " Is one of the 
most valuable contributions, not only to the plants of the 
East, but to Botany in the abstract, which has appeared in 
this country ; for the fruits of Dr. Horsfield's researches in 
Java, have elicited some of those profound observations on 
structure from Mr. Brown, which are alone sufficient to 
stamp the work with a classical authority. But, independent 
of these contributions from this eminent naturalist, we view 
Dr. Horsfield's works with peculiar satisfaction, from the 
evidence it affords of the sagacity and research of Mr. Ben- 
nett, vvho has given ample proofs, in this work, of his capa- 
city to follow in the steps of his distinguished principal. It 
is with no little pride, that we hail the dawn of a reputation, 
which is to reflect lustre on our National Establishment.^^ 

Amongst the more striking works of the Foreign Botanists, 
I need refer only to the continuation of DecandoUe's Pro- 
drommy which is completed to the end of the Composttae ; 
and when we consider the immense labour of this gigantic 
undertaking, all Botanists must be thankful for the comple-^ 
tion of any one of the families. Professor Kunth has pub- 
lished a work on the Species of Cyperacea. M. Martius 
has continued his magnificent work on the Palms. Endlicher 
has commenced a new Genera Plantarum ; and in company 
with our illustrious countryman, Mr. Bentham, has pub- 
lished Illustrations of Poppig, and UngePs Collections of 
Plants. In the physiology of plants. Professor Schleiden 
has made some important remarks on their development. 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OP LONDON. 9? 

At the present moment there is an active controversy in 
progress, especially among the German Botanists, as to the 
use of the Stamens and Germen. Professors Schleiden and 
Endlicher having broached the theory, that the stamens, in- 
stead of being the male organs, are similar to the ovaria, 
the styie as the faUqpian tubeSy and germen the ovary of the 
vertebrated animals. They state that the male organs of the 
plant are to be searched for in the stigma. 

Having now referred to some of the most important works, 
which have appeared during the past year or two, I have a 
more melancholy duty to perform, namely, to refer to the 
sreat losses, which it has been our misfortune to have ex- 
ierienced during the same period, and jou may estimate the 
extent of our deprivation, when I inform you, that France 
alone has lost A. L. de .Tussieu, Labillardier, and Desfon- 
taines, three men who have exerted the greatest influence on 
the progress of Botany in that country, and the world. They 
all lived to, and almost beyond the usual age of man ; yet, 
when I recollect the pleasure I have experienced, especially 
with the first, I can but feel as though I had lost a private 
friend. It would be useless were I to point out the labours 
of these illustrious men. Their works have had, more 
especially, the greatest efiect on the science of Botany of 
any other individuals since the time of Linnseus. 



H 



Botanttal donttp of iUjittiom 

InmtLtafd, Ho¥«mb«r a 001, 1886. 

75, NEWMAN STREET, OXFORD STREET. 

1839. 



JOHN EDWARD GRAY, Esq., F.R.S. &c. 
J. G. CHILDREN, Esq., V.P., R.S. | D. C. MACREIGHT, M.D., F.L.S. 

^xtaiuxtt, 

JOHN REYNOLDS, Esq. 

Curator, 

DANIEL COOPER, Esq., A.L.S. 

derretarg. 

GEORGE E. DENNES, Esq., F.L.S. 



®t]^er ffltwAM of t|)e Council, 

John Anderson, Esq. M.E.S. 
Francis Bossby, M.D. 
W. M. Chatterley, Esq. 
T. W. Greene, Esq. B.C.L. 
F.H.S. 



Joseph Freeman, Esq. 
H. A. Meeson, M.D. 
William Ord, M.D. 
W. H. White, Esq. 

W. H. WiLLSHIRE, M.D. 



Mr. W. Baxter, A.L.S. Botanic 

Garden, Oxford. 
T. BoDENHAM, Esq., Abbey Fore Gate, 

Shrewsbury. 
Mr. J. a. Brewer, Reigate, Surrey. 
James Buckman, Esq., Cheltenham. 
Mr. Isaac Brown, Hitchin, Herts. 
G. H. Betts, Esq., M.R.C.S. Watford, 

Herts. 
C. Conway, Esq., Pontnewydd, Mon- 
mouthshire. 
T. J. Dyke, Esq., M.R.C.S., Merthyr 

Tydvil, Glamorganshire. 
H. B. Fieldino, Esq., F.L.S., Stodday 

Lodge, Lancaster. 
W. B. Lumb, Esq., M.R.C.S. Rochdale. 

Lancashire, 
T. G. R. Rylanos, Esq., Bewsey 

House, Warrington. 
M. H. CowELL, Esq., Faversham.Kent. 
J. W. Howell, Esq., M.R.C.S., Bath. 



G. H. K. Thwaites, Esq., Bristol, 
Roberts Leyland, Esq., Halifax, 

Yorkshire. 
Edwin Lees., Esq., F.L.S., Dryadville 

Cottage, Worcester. 
F. C. LuKis, Esq., Guernsey. 
T. B. Salter, M.D. F.L.S. Poole, 

Dorsetshire. 
M. J. F. Sidney, Esq., Cowpen, near 

Morpeth, Northumberland. 
D. Stock, Esq., Bungay, Suffolk. 
Dr. Ferdinand Krauss, Cape of 

Good Hope. 
John Knott, Esq., M.R.C.S., Adelaide 

Town, South Australia. 
John J. Laughton, Esq., Kingston, 

Jamaica. 
Mr. Arthur Wallis, Chelmsford, 

Essex. 
T. B. Hall, Esq , Coggeshall, do. 



The Botanical Society of London is instituted for 
the promotion and diffusion of Botanical Science^ by the 



Second Anrmal Report. 

formation of an Herbarium ; the exchange of specimens with 
other Societies, or with individuals ; the reading of original 
and other Papers ; the formation also of a Library and Mu- 
seum ; and by the establishment of a Botanic Garden, as- 
soon as the funds of the Society will permit. 

Extract from the Second Annual Report, read 29th 

November, 1838. 

The number of Members amounts to one hundred, of 
which forty-two are Resident, thirty -four Corresponding, and 
twenty-four Foreign, forty-seven of which have been elected 
since the last Anniversary ; and the Council are happy to state 
that they have received no notice of secession of Members. 

The Council refer with pleasure to the list of donations to 
the Library, Herbarium, and Museum. The names of the 
various donors to the Library are as follow : — Messrs. J. EL 
Gray, E. Charlesworth, W.Baxter, D. Cooper, G. E. Dennes, 
J. Rich, W. F. Rock, N. Wood, Dr. Krauss, and the Bo- 
tanical Society of Edinburgh. 

Donations of British Plants have been received from the 
following Ladies and Gentlemen, arranged in the order of 
the number and value of the specimens sent : — 



H. B. Fielding. R. J. Streeten. 

C. Conway. T. B. HaU. 
T. B. Salter. F. Bossey. 

D. Cooper. A. Wallis. 
Edwin Lees. Rev. G. Gordon. 
Daniel Stock. T. Corder. 

D. C. Macreight. Isaac Brown. 

G. E. Dennes. J. F. Young. 

T. Bodenham. G. H. K. Thwaites. 

W. B. Lumb. R. Ranking. 

W. Baxter. J. Buckman. 

J. A. Brewer. J. Seeley. 

M. H. Holraan. John Anderson. 

Joseph Freeman. E. Rogers. 

J. E. Gray. J. Riley. 

W. M. Chatterley. J. Rich. 

M. H. Cowell. W. D. Paine. 

A. Rutherford. Miss C. Perry.. 

J. G. Children. T. Sansom. 



Second Annual Report, 

The number of Specimens received^ amounts to 18^92, 
including 1050 species^ from which the Society's collec- 
tion has been considerably enriched ; especially through 
the kindness of Mr. Baxter^ in presenting a valuable collec- 
tion of British Salices, comprising forty-four species, from 
specimens presented by Mr. Borrer to the Oxford Botanic 
Garden. The Society has also received nearly the whole of 
the British CariceSy and solicit the attention of Members in 
completing the genera Rosa and Rubtis, together with the 
Cryptoffamia ; and in order to afford every facility for ex- 
amining the Herbarium, the rooms of the Society will be open 
two hours previous to the chair being taken at the ordinary 
meetings, when the Curator and Secretary will attend, to 
render any required assistance. 

The distribution will take place in the month of January 
next, when each Member will receive such of his desiderata, 
as may be contained in the Herbarium, in proportion to hia 
contribution. Those Member who have not contributed to 
the Herbarium, receiving their duplicates after the distribu- 
tion to the contributors has taken place. 

The number of the Foreign plants received, amounts to 
upwards of 10,000 specimens, principally from the collection 
of the Botanical Society of Edinburgh (who also largely 
contributed to the British Herbarium), H. B. Fielding, Esq. 
Baron Macedo, Mr. Adam White, Mr. D. Cooper, and Mr. 
J. Rich. The Council have much gratification in informing 
the Members that they have made arrangements with the 
Council of the Botanical Society of Edinburgh, who have 
promised them every assistance, and that a mutual exchange 
of specimens will annually take place, which cannot fail 
to be of great advantage to the Members of both Societies. 

To Robert H. Schomburgk, Esq., the Society is much in- 
debted for communications, accompanied by drawings of 
Triplaris Americana^ and Bertholletia euccelsa, the latter ac- 
companied by sj^ecimens of the fruit, bark, and liber, of that 
tree ; and from whom a specimen of the leaf of Victoria Re- 
gina has been received, which the Council deemed advisable 
to deposit in the Herbarium of the British Museum. 

From D. Stock, Esq., the Society has also received a va- 
luable collection of Seeds. 

In order to advance as much as possible the interests of 
the Society, the Council have caused to be published a sheet 
of the whole of " De Candolle's Natural Orders and Genera" 
together with the whole of the " Linmean Classes and Or- 
ders" in such a form as will serve the purpose of arranging 



Second Annual Report. 

British collections.* This, in conjunction with the list of 
species published by the Botanical Society of Edinburgh, will 
furnish the British collector with a complete series of printed 
labels of the Natural and Artificial orders, genera, and species, 
for the wrappers of his collection. 

In conclusion, the Council have to state that they are 
much indebted to the following Members for their interest- 
ing communications, some of which will be published in the 
forthcoming proceedings of the Society. 

Dr. F. Bossey, Messrs. W. M. Chatterley, D. Cooper, 
George E. Dennes, J. Riley, Robert H. Schomburgk, J. 
Rich, A. Wallis, W. H. White, &c. &c. 

The Meetings of the Society are held on the first and third 
Friday of the month, from November to June ; and on the 
first Friday of every other month, at their rooms, 75, Newman 
Street, Oxford Street, at 8 o'clock, p.m. precisely; where 
communications to the Secretary are requested to be ad- 
dressed. 

Ladies are eligible as Members upon the same terms, and 
possess the same privileges as gentlemen. 

Annual dubielmpttonil : 

Resident Members, One Guinea ; Life Subscription, Seven 
Guineas; Corresponding Members, Half a Guinea; Life 
Subscriptions, Three Guineas and a half; Admission Fee, 
One Guinea. 



• The Catalogue of Plants above alluded to, may be had of Longman and Co., 
London ; Maclachlan and Co., Edinburgh ; Currie and Co., Dublin. Price One 
Shilling. 



LIST OF MEMBERS 



OF THB 



BOTANICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, 



FEBRUARY 1839. 



I.— HONORARY MEMBERS. 

BRITISH. 

1838. His Grace the Dukb of Nobthumbbrland. 

His Ghrace the Dukb of Bedford. 

His Grrace the Dukb of Dbyonshirb. 

Sir Wm. Jackson Hookbr, F.R.S., F.R.A.S. F.L.S. 
&c. &c., Regius Professor of Botany in the Uni- 
versity of Glasgow. 

Alymbr Boubkb Lambbrt, F.R.S., Vice President of 
\ the Linnsean Society. 

John Josbfh Bbnnbtt, F.L.S., M.R.G.S., &c. 

RoBBRT Graham, M.D., F.R.S.E., Pres. Bot. Soc. 
Edin.,. Professor of Botany in the University of 
Edinburgh. 

Thomas Coultbr, M.D., M.R.I.A. 



FOREIGN. 
1838. 
April 20th. Caroltjs Adolfhus Aoardh, Acad, Reg. Sc. Holm. 

Soc. Episcopus Carlstadiensis, Lund. 
Carolus Ltjdovicus Blumb, M.D., Instit. Reg. Batav. 
Soc, Lugduni, Batavorum. 



100 LIST OP MEMBERS. 

1838. 
April 20. Adolphus Bbooniart, M.D., Professor of Botany at 

the Gkurden of Plants, Paris. 
Augusts Pyramb Db Candollb, F.R.S., F.L.S.^ 

Member of the Institute of France, and Piofessor 

of Natural History, at Geneva. 
GoTTHBLF FiscHEB De Waldheim, M.D., Professor 

of Natural History, Moscow. 
Baron Benjamin De Lessebt, Hon. Memb. of the 

Academy of Science, Paris. 
Elias Fbies, M.D., Professor of Botany, Lund. 
Don M. La Gasca, F.L.S., Professor of Botany, 

Madrid. 
Asa Gbay, M. D., New York. 
James Wilken Hobnbmann, F.L.S., Professor of 

Botany, Copenhagen. 
Alexandeb Babon De Humboldt, F.R.S., F.L.S. 

Member of the Institute of France, and of the 

Royal Academy of Sciences, Berlin. 
Adbian De Jussieu, M.D., Member of the Institute 

of France, and Professor of Botany at Paris. 
Cabolus S. Kunth, Corresponding Member of the 

Institute of France, Berlin. 
Henby Fbbdebick Link, M.D., F.L.S., Professor of 

Botany, and Member of the Royal Academy of 

Sciences, Berlin. 
Babon Von Ludwig, Cape of Good Hope. 
Babon Macedo, Lisbon. 
C. F. P. Db Mabtius, M.D., F.L.S., Member of the 

Royal Academy of Sciences, and Director of the 

Botanic Garden, Munich. 
C. F. Bbisseau Mibbel, F.L.S., Member of the 

Institute of France, and Professor of Botany at 

the Sorbonne, Paris, 
C. G. Nees Von Esenbeck, M.D., F.L.S., President 

of the Imperial Academy Naturae Curiosorum, and 

Professor of Botany, Breslau, 
Robebt H. Sohombubgk, British Guiana. 
Gbobgius Wahlenbebo, M.D., Professor of Botany, 

Upsal. 



LIST OF MEMBERS. 101 

IL— RESIDENT MEMBERS. 

1836. 
Original John Edward Gray, Esq., F.R.S., P.G.S., F.Z.S., 
Members. &c., &c.. President. 

Daniel Chambers Macrbight, M.D., F.L.S., F.B.S.E. 
Vice President. 

John Reynolds, For. Sec, M.S.L., Treasurer. 

Daniel Cooper, A.L.S., Curator. 

George Edgar Dbnnbs, F.L.S., &c., Secretary. 

Francis Bossby, M.D. 

William Maddox Chatterley. 

Thomas Webb Grbbnb, B.C.L., F.H.S. 

Joseph Freeman. 

Henry Ashton Meeson, M.D. 

A. Gerard. 

W. H. White, Sec. M.S.L. 

James Forbes Young, M.D. 

^EneasMac Intyre, LL.D., F.L.S., V.P.M.S.L. 

Edward Charlesworth, F.G.S. 

S. Sly. 

Robert Davis. 

John Kernan. 

James Rich. 

J. S. Wilkinson, F.L.S. 

George Rich. 

C. F. Pollard, 

W. F. Rock. 

Mrs, Gawler. 

Mrs. Dennison. 

Miss Branfill. 



Dec. 15. 


Arnold. 


1837. 




Jan. 5. 


William Dunkeley Paine. 




William Frodsham. 


Jan. 19. 


John Simon. 


March 2. 


Edward Rogers. 




James Dean. 


March 16. 


R. E. Crawley, 




Harvey Gem. 




Charles Lingwood. 



102 LIST OF MEMBERS. 

May 4. F, J. Staniforth. 
Nov. 16. Thomas Saxsom. 

John Anderson^ M.E.S. 
George Cooper. 
1838. 
August 3. John George Children, V.P.R.S,,F.L.S.,H.M.C.P.S., 

&c., &c., Vice President. 
John Green, M.M.S. 
Nov. 2. William Ord, M.D. 
Nov. 16. W. H. Willshirb, M.D. 

1839. 
Jan, 4. W. H. Harton. 
Feb. 1. Adam White, M.E.S. 



III.— CORRESPONDING MEMBERS. 

Elected Thomas Bell Salter, M.D., F.L.S., F.B.S,E., Poole, 
previous to Dorsetshire. 

Nov. 1836. Miss Charlotte Perry, Stroud, near Haslemere, 

Surrey. 
Dec. 15. Charles Conway, Pontnewydd, Monmouthshire. 

1837. 
Jan. 5. William Baxter, F.H.S., A.L.S., Botanic Garden, 

Oxford. 
Jan. 19. Robert Ranking, F.L.S., Hastings, Sussex. 

F. C. LuKis, Guernsey. 
Feb. 2. Arthur Wallis, Chelmsford, Essex. 
Feb. 16. James Seeley, Thames Ditton, Surrey. 
March 16. Roberts Leyland, Halifax, Yorkshire. 
July 6. James Buckman, Cheltenham. 
Dec. 21. James A. Brewer, Reigate, Surrey. 

Thomas Bodenham, Abbey Fore Grate, Shrewsbury. 
Edwin Lees, F.L.S., F.B.S.E., Forthampton, near 
Tewkesbury. , 
1838. 
March 2. Henry B. Fielding, F.L.S., Stodday Lodge, Lancaster. 
R. J. N. Streeten, M.D., F.B.S.E., Worcester. 



LIST OF MEMBERS. 103 

April 20. M. J. F. Sidnbt, F.B.S.E., Coivpen, near Morpeth, 

Northumberland. 

J. W. Howell, M.R.C.S., Bath. 
May 18. J. Rilbt, Papplewick, near Nottingham. 

Danibl Stock, Bungay, Suffolk. 
July 6. J. CoMFiBLD, Cheltenham. 

Isaac Bbown, Hitchin, Herts. 

Thomas Cordbb, A.L.S., Writtle, Essex. 
Ang. 3. M. H. Co WELL, Faversham, Kent. 

John Knott, M.R.C.S., Adelaide Town, South Aus- 
tralia, 
Sept. 7. George Haevet Betts, M.R.C.S., Watford, Herts. 

Henrt Martin Holman, Reigate, Surrey. 
Oct. 5. G. H. K. Thwaites, M.E.S., Bristol. 
Nov. 2. T. B. Hall, Coggeshall, Essex. 
Nov. 16. Miss Elizabeth Harvbt, Deal, Kent. 

Harrt Baber, F.B.S.E., Ely, Cambridgeshire. 

C. A. Stevens, F.B.S.E., Rochester, Kent. 

W. B. Lumb, M.R.C.S., Rochdale, Lancashire. 

Thomas Jones Dyke, M.R.C.S., Merthyr Tydvil, 
Glamorganshire . 
Dec. 7. T. G. R. Rylands, Bewsey House, Warrington. 

1839. 
Jan. 4. John J. Laughton, Kingston, Jamaica. 
Feb. 1. Henry Kinosley, Uxbridge, Middlesex. 
Feb. 15. F. J. White, F.L.S., F.B.S.E., Edinburgh. 

H. B. Harris, F.B.S.E., Edinburgh. 



^I^' 'flu aim,„ 



or Uriht m Ac Aa. 





;«= 


>- ^ 


V 

N 


y 
/ 


1/ 




"# 1 

^ V 





V 



"-<fc-Vi 




TrxploTX^ ,4rrierica7Lcu 





2 



^ 




'¦H^KT. 



^^^^br.- 



FLZ. 





/ 



V' 







:/¦'• 




;-¦ // 




^ 




*r.: 



.iS'-rff'olieO'A. occciya-. 




f 



¦\ 



..'* 



•9 



* 



^i* 



» 



WORKS PUBLISHED BY MEMBERS. 



A MANUAL OF BRITISH BOTANY, 

In which the Orders and Genera are arranged and described accord- 
ing to the Natural System of Dbcandollb, with a Series of Ana- 
lytical Tables for the assistance of the Student in the examination 
of the plants indigenous to, or commonly cultivated in Great Britain. 
By D. C. Macrbight, M.D., V.P., &c. London, 1837, John 
ChurchiU, Prince's Street, Soho. Price 78. 6d., 12mo, neatly 
bound in cloth. 



FLORA METROPOLITANA, 

WITH SUPPl T7.MENT : or BOTANICAL RAMBLES WITHIN 
THIRTY MI..ES OF LONDON. By Daniel Coopeb, Lecturer 
on Botany, <?"3. London, 1837. Darton and Clark, Holbom Hill; 
S. Highley, Fl-et Street. Price 6s. 12mo, neatly bound in cloth. 



May be had Separate, 

SUPPLEMENT TO THE FLORA METROPOLITANA, 

Containing an Index of the English and Latin names, their time of 
flowering, colour of the flower, and heights in feet of the principal 
localities around tl^e Metropolis ; together with additional localities 
for 1836« Price Is. 6d. sewed. 



Printed for the Society. 

A CATALOGUE OF THE BRITISH NATURAL 

ORDERS AND GENERA, 

Arranged according to the SYSTEM OF DECANDOLLE, together 
with the LINN^AN CLASSES AND ORDERS, intended to serve 
as labels for arranging British Collections, either according to the 
Natural or Artificial Systems. Longman and Co. ; Machlachlau 
and Co. Price Is each, on a double demy sheet. 



By Subscription. 

CONTRIBUTIONS TO A FLORA OF LIVERPOOL, 

By T. B. Hall, Coir. Mem. Bot. Soc. Lond., and^Local Secretary 

for Coggeshall, Essex, &c. Price 4s. 

Subscribers' names received by Mr. G. White, 12, Hatton Garden, 

London. 



PubHshed on the first of every month. Vol. 3, New Series^ 

THE MAGAZINE OF NATURAL HISTORY, 

Conducted by Edward Charlesworth. F.G.S., &c., formerly by 
J. C. Loudon, F.L.S. London, Longman and Co., Paternoster 
Row. Price 28. 

N. B.— Volumes 1 and 2 of the New Series may be had of the Publisher!. 



^^-' 



WORKS PUBLISHED BY MEMBERS. 



A FLORAL GUIDE FOR EAST KENT, &c. 

Being a record of the habitats of Indigenous Plants found in the 
Eastern division of the County of Kent, with those of Favershara 
minutely detailed, and definitely exhibited ; together with brief re- 
marks on the uses of the several Species in Domestic Economy, Agri- 
culture, • Medicine, and Manufactures ; deduced from various 
authorities. Illustrated by Two Maps. By M. H. Cowell, Cor- 
responding Member of the Botanical Society of London, and Local 
Secretary for Faversham. Price 5s. Fine Paper, 8vo, Boards. 



'•«, 



On the First of every month, 

FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF THE GENERA 
OF BRITISH FLOWERING PLANTS, 

By W. Baxter, F.H.S., A.L.S., &c., Curator of the Botanic Gar- 
den, Oxford, aud Local Secretary for Oxford. Price Is. 6d. co- 
loured. Is. plain. 

The First and Second Volume, Price £1 Is, coloured, or 10s. ^d. 

plain. 

Vol. 3, 8vo, cloth, with 80 coloured plates, £1 1 Is. 6d., or with 
plain plates, £1 Is. Whitaker and Co., London. - 



THE LITTLE BOOK OF BOTANY, 

Or, FAMILIAR EXPOSITION OF BOTANICAL SCIENCE, 
simplified and written expressly for Young Botanists. With Plates. 
By Daniel Cooper, Lecturer on Botany, &c. Darton and Clark, 
Holborn Hill. Price Is. 6d., cloth. 



AlsQ, by Subscription only ; « 

ACTUAL SPECIMENS OF MOST OP THE BRITISH 
LAND AND FRESH WATER SHELLS, \. 

(100 IN NUMBER.) 

Arranged i^ a Book Box, the size of an 8vo. volume, with seven 
shelves, bound, lettered, &c., with a Catalogue, forming a neat and 
interesting collection. Price £2 2s. 

Subscribers* names received by Mr. D. Cooper, 82, Blackfriars Ilo ul. 

London. 




..e.»^ 



\- , . 



¦ \ 



/ 



\ 



/ •> 






I 



1 



t» 



4 



,1 









i 




i 



l 3 2044 103 1 



"^••¦•^r'^H 



mm 



• I 



i 

I' 















I I <¦ ¦¦ » l^ I p-^n^^ 



¦z- ^ 



I .%. ¦ 



'¦j^^sT' 



/ 



' ( 



N \ 






j'> 



¦ ". -^ * 



't-vJ .-.rV 



:¦»> 








