UNlv i Y Oi- 
ILLINO :) . :i-!ARY 
AT URBANA CHAlVIPAiGN 
BIOLOGY 



Di 


igitized by the Internet 


Archive 






in 2014 









https://archive.org/details/naturalist1882west 



"11 



i 



" NeC TEMERE NEC TIMIDE." 



THE 

NATURALIST: 

Journal of the Yorkshire Naturahsts' 

Union, 

AND 

GENEEAL FIELD CLUB RECORD. 

NEW SERIES. 

- • 

Edited by C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., and G. T. Porpitt, F.L.S. 



VOL. VIIL, 1882-3. 



HUDDERSFIELD : 

B. BROWN, PRINTER AND STATIONER, MARKET PLACE CORNER. 



INDEX TO VOL. Vm. 



ORIGINAL ARTICLES. 

PAGE 

Attempt to classify the British Lepidoptera, so as to form a connection 
with the Trichoptera at one end, and the Hymenoptera at the 

other— S. L. Mosley 87 

Birds of the Wilsden District— E. P. P. Butterfield 162 

Caddis-fly Hunting in 1882~A. H. Swinton 161 

Cinclidium stygium^ Swartz — J. Cash ... ... ... ... ... 150 

„ „ —Rev. E. IST. Bloomfield, M.A 154 

Classification of British Insects — S. L. Mosley 4, 24 

Coleoptera of the Liverpool District — John W. Ellis, L.R.C.P», &c. ... 113 

Conchological Field Notes from Wensleydale — Wm. Denison Roebuck 81 

Darwin and Darwinism — Rev. S. Fletcher Williams ... ... ... 17, 36 

Ferns of York and Neighbourhood — Robert Miller Christy ... 177 
Geography of British Plants, On the Present State of our Knowledge of 

the— J. Gilbert Baker, F.R.S " 129, 145 

Gooseberry Caterpillar, Nematus Ribesii — Miss E. A. Ormerod, F.M.S. 100 

Hemiptera of Lancashire and Cheshire — Benjamin Cooke 33, 65 

Homoptera of Lancashire and Cheshire — „ 71 

Mosses, New and Critical European — G. Limpricht ... 49 

Paludella sqiiarrosa^ Notes on — J. Cash ... ... ... ... 2 

Physiological Arrangement of British Lepidoptera — A. H. Swinton ... 98 

Racomitrium papillosum^ Notes on — G. Limpricht 1 

Semerdale, Notes on its Molluscan Fauna— W. Denison Roebuck ... 52 

South Africa, Natural History Notes from— S. D. Bairsto\v, F.L.S., 89, 102 

[119, 166 

Sphagnum Torreya^ium, SuUivant, in Britain — H. Boswell 49 

Trip of the Season : or the Phantom Cicada — A. H. Swinton ... 35 

Winter Birds, Scarcity of— George Roberts 97 

Working Man Botanist ... 118 

NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS. 

Acherontia Atropos at Huddersfield— James Varley 56 

Algse, Additions to West Riding— W. West 27 

Badger in Cleveland— W. GregSQ^ / - / x a, %y c:^ 123 



iv. 

PAGE 

Badgers in Yorkshire — C. C. Hanson 108 

Badger, Otter, Polecat — George Roberts 73 

Bird Notes from Newton Kyme, near Tadcaster 136 

Bottle-nosed Dolphins — Thomas Bunker 56 

British Association Meeting at Southampton 11 

Cinclidium stygium, Swartz — W. West ... 185 

Cychrus vostratus at Grassington and Gilstead — J. W. Carter 75 

„ at Huddersfield — S. L. Moseley 75 

„ in Semerdale— W. D. Roebuck 56 

Diptera, Extraordinary Mortality amongst — C. C. Hanson and R. H. 

Meade 10 

Duckling, Curious Freak of a— E. Hailstone 187 

Eagle Owls {BtUeo maxiimis) breeding in captivity — Walter Raine ... 10 

Economic Entomology — S. L. Mosley 155 

Entomological Notes— G. T. Porritt, F.L.S. ... 74,94, 108 

„ „ — E. P. P. Butterfield 75 

„ „ Bradford — J. W. Carter 56 

„ „ York— T. Wilson 108, 124 

Fieldfares near Huddersfield— George Roberts 73 

Yonm^^vt [Mustela piitorms) in Yorkshire — 0. 0. Hanson ... ... 155 

Golden-eye Duck and White Sparrow at Elland — C. C. Hanson ... 73 

Hodder-Dale, Notes on the Flora of — Rev. Wm. Fowler, M.A. ... 9 

Ichneumons in Yorkshire — G. P. Porritt, F.L.S. ... ... ... .., 57 

Insect, An undetermined Yorkshire — Rev. E. N. Bloomfield, M.A. 94 

Insect Captures in Scotland — Alfred Beaumont ... ... ... ... 93 

Insects, Effects of Weather on— Miss E. Ormerod, F.M.S 57, 75 

Lepidoptera in Ireland — Rev. G. G. B. Madden, B.A 26 

Leptoscyphus interruptus, Nees — W. H. P. ... ... ... ... 156 

Migrants, Arrival in Ryburn Valley — F. G. S. Rawson ... ... ... 154 

„ Late, near Halifax— F. G. S. Rawson ... ... ... 56 

Migrations, Early, of Birds — James Varley 56 

Mollusca, Monograph of British 187 

Morchella semilibera at Doncaster — A. Clark 185 

Moss, A New British — H. Bosw^ell 185 

Mosses, New Y^orkshire — William West 57 

Nests and Eggs, Notes on— George Roberts 186 

Nightingale at Scarborough— W. E. Clarke, F.L.S 10 

Nightjar— J. H. Gurney, F.Z.S. 186 

Otters in Halifax Parish — C. C. Hanson ; 135 

Fsylliodes hyoscyami — Benjamin Cooke ... ... ... 94 

Ilhizomorpha siihcorticalis in YoT]L^\n.x(i — C. P. H. ... ... ... 156 



Scoparia conspiciialis and Acronycta alni at Edlington Wood — G. T. 

Porritt, F.L.S 27 

Sericomyia borealis — Rev. E. N. Bloomfield, M.A. 122 

Shells, additional to the Beverley List — J. D. Butterell 185 

Sirex gigas at Huddersfield— Eev. G. C. B. Madden, B.A. 75 

Snow Bunting — George Roberts 74 

Sphagnum Austini, SulL, in S.W. Scotland — C. P. H 75 

Wensleydale Shell List, Additions to the — W. Denison Roebuck ... 125, 155 

Wharf edale. Natural History Notes from — George Roberts ... .. 171 

Winter Birds, Scarcity of — Thomas Carter 123 

World in Miniature— J. D. Butterell 122 



RAINFALL. 



1882. 


PAGE. 


1882-3. 


PAGE. 


June, 


11 


December, 


107 


July, 


27 


January, 


125 


August, 


43 


February, 


137 


September, 


59 


March, 


158 


October, 


73 


April, 


171 


November, 


93 


May, 


187 



REPORTS OF SOCIETIES. 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society 13, 28, 43, 59, 78, 95, 111, 126, 137, 159, 172, 187 

Beverley Field Naturalists' and Scientific Society ... Ill, 137, 160, 172, 188 

Bradford Naturalists' Society 28, 60, 78, 95, 111, 126, 159 

Huddersfield Naturalists' Society 95, 188 

Ilkley Scientific Club 13 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society ... 13, 30, 44, 61, 79, 96, 126, 

[139, 173 

Leeds Naturalists' Club and Scientific Association 127 

Malton Naturalists' Society 138 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society ... 13, 44, 61, 96, 112, 138, 160, 188 

Ovenden Naturalists' Society 14, 45, 189 

Port Elizabeth NaturaKsts' Society 80, 127 

Ripon Naturalists' Club 80, 128 

Scarborough Scientific Society 62 

Wakefield Naturalist and Philosophical Society 14'- 45 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Snaith Meeting 

Do. Do. Scarborough Meeting 

Do. Do. Beverley Meeting 

Do. Do. Grassington Meeting 

Do. Do. Wakefield Meeting 



14 
14 
16 
30 
45 



vi. 

PAGE 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union.— -Thirsk Meeting ... ' 62 

Do.* Do. Selby, Annual Meeting 139 

Do. Do. Doncaster Meeting 173 

Do. Do. Filey Meeting 189 

York, St. Thomas Field Naturalists' Society ... ... ... ... 138 

OBITUARY. 

Benjamin Cooke .125 

William Talbot 11 

James Varley 110 



NOTICES OF BOOKS. 

" Children's Flowers : the Friends of their Rambles and their Play " ..= 75 
*' Hepaticse Britannicoa Ex&iccatse " — B. Carrington, M.D., and W. H. 

Pearson 136 

^' On Cephalozia (a genus of Hepaticse), its Sub-genera and allied 

Genera" — Eichard Spruce 156 



LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS TO VOL. Yin. 



Bairstow, S. D., F.L.S. 


89, 102, 119, 166 


Baker, John Gilbert, F.R.S 


129, 145 


Beaumont, Alfred i 


93 


Bloomfield, Rev. E. N., M.A 


94, 122, 154 


Boswell, H. ... ' 


49, 185 


Bunker, Thomas 


56 


Butterell, J. Darker 


122, 185 


Butterfield, E. P. P 


75, 162 


Carter, J. W 


56, 75 


Carter, Thomas 


123 


Cash, J. 


2, 150 


Christy, Robert Miller 


177 


Clark, A 


185 


Clarke, William Eagle, F.L.S. ... 


10 


Cooke, Benjamin 


33, 65, 71, 94 


Ellis, John W., L.R.C.P., &c 


113 


Fowler, Rev. Wm., M.A 


... 9 


Gregson, W. 


123 


Gurney, J. H., F.Z.S 


186 


Hailstone, E. 


187 


Hanson, Cassius C 


10, 73, 108, 135, 155 



Hobkirk, C. P., F.L.S 

Limpricht, G. ... 

Madden, Rev. G. C. B., B A. 

Meade, R. H 

Mosley, S. L 

Ormerod, Miss Eleanor A. F.M.S. 

Porritt, G. T., F.L.S 

Raine, Walter 

Rawson, F. G. S 

Roberts, George 

Roebuck, William Denison 

Swinton, A, H. 

Varley, James 

West, William 

Williams, Rev. S. Fletcher 
Wilson, T 



PAGE 

75, 156 

1, 49 

26, 75 

10 

4, 24, 75, 87, 155 
57, 75, 100 
27, 57, 74, 94, 108 

10 

56, 154 

73, 74, 97, 171, 186 
52, 56, 81, 125, 155 
... 35, 98, 161 

56 

... 27, 57, 185 

17, 36 

108, 124 



Original Jlrtkla. 



NOTES ON RACOMITRIUM PAPILLOSUM, 



By G-. Limpricht, 
In ''Flora," 1882, K 13.— Translated, 

Racomitrium papillosum, Kindherg ; Vfarnstorf in Hedwigia,'^ 
1881, n. 11. According to the text of this publication, it appears to 
be uncertain who really is answerable, as author, for this species. 
This form, recently published as a ^' distinct species " which should 
represent an intermediate form between Racomitriuyn patens and 
Racomitrium sudeticum, is, according to original specimens before me, 
the sterile form of Grimmia elatior, Br. and Sch., as it occurs in 
different stations in the Sudeten ; on the Baliagora ; in Scotland ; 
Norway ; and the Alps on much exposed rocks. 

I have previously made the remark (in the Kryptfi. von Schl : I. p. 
160), that there are two f-orms of this species, and we also find that 
previous writers have had their attention drawn to this particular 
variety. Schimper referred this form to Grimmia Schultzii ; C. Miiller 
to Grimmia funalis; C. Hartmann earlier considered it as Grimmia 
funalis^ elatior ] and De Notaris (in Syllab. n. 333), distinguished it 
as Grimmia funalis rohusta. 

Sometimes it approaches nearer to Grimmia Schultzii (in this form 
it is generally fertile), sometimes it agrees more with Grimmia funalis, 
and in this form I only know it barren. 

The possibility that both forms should be specifically distinct 
appeared to me to be inadmissible. 

Hitherto, nothing has been published with regard . to some of the 
characters of Grirr.mia elatior^ and this omission appears to me to have 
led to the creation of Racomitrium papillosum. 

The upper part of the leaf of Grimmia elatior consists of a double 
layer, our Silesian specimens even having three and four layers (hence 
the opacity of the cell structure), and both sides of the thickened leaf, 
as also the oval carina (as is seen by a cross section), are covered with 
semi-circular papillae, rising from the lumen of the cell. In the fertile 
specimens from the Alps, this thickening extends over a smaller portion 
of the leaf, and the cuticle is as a rule smooth, but there are specimens 
now lying before me which show the papillse, therefore I consider the 
dark-green mostly -sterile Silesian form, and those of the north of 
Europe to be var. pseudo funalis. Schimper, in the Syn. ed. II," p. 
259, has, in the accompanying note more correctly described the teeth 
of the peristome of Grimmia elatior, than in the text of the diagrams. 

N, S., Vol. viii.— Aug., 1882. 



2 The Natuhalist^ 

In Grimmia Schultzii, the papillae are entirely wanting, and in the 
upper part of the leaf the margin only is composed of two or three 
layers. Racoinitrium patens has on the back (on the nnder side) of the 
carina, two, three, and four longitudinal laminse, and Racomitrium 
papillosum is said to possess a " Nervus lamellosus," yet the original 
shows no trace of one, but its carina resembles exactly that of Grimmia 
elatior. 

It has been customary, with regard to certain Grimmias, to speak of 
a furrowed carina, but we all now know that in these instances, as a 
matter of fact, they possess no furrow, but that the clear streak which 
the extended leaf shows in the mediane of its rib when you allow the 
light to fall through it (i.e, if you hold it before the light) has another 
origin. 

In Racomitrium patens and sudeticum the leaves have a one-layered 
lamina, yet the leaf-margin of the first consists, in its upper part, of 
two or three layers, with the last one sometimes of two layers. 

Grimmia fnnalis shows no papillae, and only the upper leaf-margin 
consists of two layers. 

The papillose nature of Racomitrium protensum has already been 
described by Lorentz. 

In Racomitrium canescens the papillae rest upon the lumen of the 
cells ; in Grimmia anomala Hampe, on the contrary, upon the lumen, 
and also upon the cell- wall. 

Grimmia elatior forma subinermis asperula (Sanio) Geheeb Beitrage 
zur Moosfiorades Westl. Sibirens ("Flora" 1879, n. 30), B. asperulum^ 
Geheeb, is doubtless the same form which has given occasion to the 
creation of Racomitrium papillosum. 



NOTES ON SOME EAHE BRITISH MOSSES. 



By James Cash. 



(Read before the Manchester Cryptogamic Society, 1st May, 1882.) 
TALUDELLA SQUARROSA. 
This moss was discovered by Mr. Wilson, at Knutsf ord, on the 1 6th 
April, 1832. He had been to Vale Royal, and crossed to Knutsford 
to observe the condition of the mosses previously found growing in the 
bog. This entry in Mr. Wilson's diary is the first mention made any- 
where of Paludella squarrosa as a British moss : Found a new bryum 
of the squarrose-leaved kind, very elegant, but barren." The next day 



Cash : Paludella squa^rosa* 



3 



Mr. Wilson examined the new moss, wliich he believed to be Bryum 
squarrosum^ Hedw. {Hypnum paludella, Web. and Mohr, 274) : he 
found it to possess terminarperichetia, with abortive pistilla." He 
was correct as to the species. 

On the 19th of April Mr. Wilson wrote to Dr. Hooker, announcing 
the discovery of Bryum sguarrosum^ and enclosing specimens and 
drawings. Letters conveying the same information were written to 
other botanists, among the rest to J. De Sowerby, Mr. W. H. Harvey 
— then a young and enthusiastic botanist fast rising into note — and to 
Professor Henslow, of Cambridge University, not forgetting, either, 
one of the Lancashire artisan botanists, with whom he had frequent 
correspondence — John Martin, of Tyldesley. The moss, with otherSj 
was figured by Mr. Wilson for the second edition of English Botany. 
There is no doubt that the original station for Paludella squarrosa at 
Knutsford has been destroyed by drainage. 

It may be interesting to note that Hypnum nitens and Mniim affine, 
both fertile, were found at the same time and in the same locality. 
The fertile H. nitens grew " not far from B. sqicatTosum, nearer the 
brook, on the other side of the path," and there was another station 
for it " near the fertile H, stellalum, more towards the mere, and rather 
nearer the brook." These words are quoted from Mr. Wilson's diary. 
They are too obscure to be of practical use now. Mr. Wilson appears 
to have searched the bog carefully for B, squarrosum, for he records, on 
the 10th May, 1832, that he was " unable to find any second station 
for it." 

This, as far as is known, is all the information to be had about the 
occurrence of Paludella squarrosa at Knutsford. But ten years later, 
certain muscologists in Yorkshire made diligent and successful search 
both for this moss and for H. BlandoviL An interesting letter from 
Mr. Henry Ibbotson to Mr. Wilson, dated Gabthorpe, near Whitwell, 
Mar. 1st, 1842, has been preserved, in which the writer says : " You 
have, I presume, received specimens of H. nitens and H, Blandovii, all 
the productions of a bog in this neighbourhood, from our respected 
friend Mr. Spruce, who informs me, upon your authority, that the same 
plants, together with B. squarrosum, grow in a bog in Cheshire, and 
that you suggested that our locality for the two former plants might 
also be likely to produce the latter. I have, therefore, been induced 
to examine the place very carefully, and am pretty well convinced that 
the plant is not there to be met with. A short distance, however, 
from this bog there is another which I never visited previous to 
Thursday last, when I found it to produce the same plants as the 



4 



The Na^turalist. 



(with the exception of H, Blandovii), and, in addition, plenty of B, 
scpiarrosum^ occupying the space of an acre at least- From the circum- 
stance of your being the first discoverer of the plant in Britain, the 
intelligence of a new station being detected, with a few specimens 
therefrom (which I now enclose), may be interesting. I am sorry that 
I have not been able to find it in a state of fructification ; but T shall 
frequently have opportunities of visiting the place, and as this may not 
be the proper season, I trust that I shall have the pleasure of finding 
it at some future time. , , . H. nitens will yield an abundant 
crop of fruit in this bog." 

Of the present condition of the above-mentioned locality I am sorry 
not to possess any positive information. It is, however, understood 
to have been drained, and the rarities mentioned have been wholly or 
partially destroyed. 



ON THE CLASSIFICATION OF BRITISH INSECTS. 



By S. L. Mosley, Huddersfibld. 

(Read before the Lane, and Ches. Ent. Soc, April 24tli, 1882.) 
The purpose of a classification of any objects — natural or other- 
wise, is, I need scarcely state, to bring together those which are 
nearest related. This is often not very difficult when we make a 
number of common centres, or represent the various divisions like 
the branches of a tree, all diverging from, and dependent on a 
common beginner or ancestor, which doubtless is the most natural 
way of arrangement ; but we have not yet discovered any method by 
which this arrangement can be represented in a cabinet drawer, or a 
set of unseen cases, and we are placed at some disadvantage by being 
obliged to follow a linear arrangement, beginning at one point and 
ending at another. Such an arrangement must, as a matter of course^ 
be more or less imperfect, because the various branched affinities 
cannot be adequately represented. However, there is a certain degree 
of perfection attainable, and it is possible to so arrange most natural 
objects as to show a more or less unbroken continuity from end to 
end. 

The insect world forms a wide field for the ingenious mind to work 
upon, for while its members agree in certain particulars, they are so 
diversified in their structure and their habits, their similarities and 
dissimilarities are so constant and so numerous, that it has been a 



MosLEY : On Classification of Beitish Insects. 



5 



task upon entomologists, from time immemorial to say, which is the 
most natural way of arranging these tiny creatures. 

The first system worthy of note is that invented by Swammerdam, 
in which he divides insects into four primary groups as follows : — 

1. Insects subject to a change of skin, but undergoing' no change of 
form (spiders, lice, woodlice, and centipedes). 

2. Hexapod insects subject to metamorphosis, having an active 
pupa, in which the rudimentary wings and wing-cases are exposed 
(bugs, dragon-flies, grasshoppers, and mayflies). 

3. Hexapod insects undergoing metamorphosis, in which the pupa 
state is quiescent, either having the limbs enclosed in distinct cases 
(beetles, bees, wasps, &c., and part of the Neuroptera and Diptera), or 
covered with an entire case (butterflies, moths). 

4. Hexapod insects undergoing metamorphosis, the pupa state 
having neither motion or wings, but enclosed in an ovate case (most 
Diptera and other insects). 

This system which is based upon the form or condition of the pupa, 
is imperfect in splitting up closely allied groups. For instance, the 
Neuroptera and Diptera are each split and placed in two divisions. 

Leaving the older and coming to more modern times we find another 
system of classification of winged insects propounded by Ed. Newman, 
and based upon the characters of the pupa, which is very similar to one 
propounded by Lamarck. Like Swammerdam, Newman makes four 
primary divisions, viz : — 

1. Amorpha^ in which the pupa has ^neither mouth nor organs of 
locomotion and bears no resemblance to the perfect insect (Lepidoptera 
and Diptera. 

2. Necromorpha^ in which the pupa has both mouth and organs of 
locomotion, but enveloped in several cases, and incapable of use 
(Hymenoptera, Coleoptera). 

3. Isomo7yha, in which the mouth and limbs are present and used 
(Orthoptera, Hemiptera). 

4. Anisomorpha^ in which all the before-mentioned characters are 
present, and some independent ones (Neuroptera). 

This system, though presenting certain degrees of correctness, yet 
brings together insects of little aflinity, and at the same time 
separates others which are nearly allied, like the Neuroptera and 
Trichoptera. It is likewise subject to many exceptions; we find 
necromorphous pupse among the lepidoptera — the burnets, for 
instance. Some dipterous pupae are locomotive ; the Coleoptera, and 
especially the Neuroptera, present many striking exceptions. 



6 



The Naturalist. 



Leaving now the classification according to the pupae, we turn to 
that of arrangement by the affinities of the imago ] and while I would 
not take any one stage of the existence upon which to base a classifica- 
tion, but take the whole life- history into consideration, yet the imago 
should rank as of first importance, because we know most about that 
state ; and it is in that state in which insects are generally arranged 
for public examination. 

The first classification based upon characters of the imago is that of 
Linnaeus, and is founded upon the characters of the wings. His first 
division is, those having four wings ; the next, those with two wings ; 
and the third, those destitute of wings — which results in the following 
distribution of the different orders : — 

1. Coleoptera 5. Hymenoptera 

2. Hemiptera 6. Diptera 

3. Lepidoptera 7. Apt era 

4. Neuroptera 

After this came the system of Fabricius, founded mainly upon tl^e 
characters of the mouth part, but when we see that it resulted in the 
crabs and lobsters being placed between the Neuroptera and the 
Lepidoptera, we may venture to dismiss it as unsuitable, at least for 
our present purposes. 

We now come to the system of Olivier, in which the characters of 
both wings and mouth are used as a means of classification, which 
resulted in the following arrangement : — 

1. Thysanura 7. Hemiptera 

2. Parasita 8. Neuroptera 
8. Siphonaptera (fleas) 9. Hymenoptera 

4. Coleoptera 10. Lepidoptera 

5. Dermaptera (earwigs.) 11. Ehipipt era (bee parasites.) 

6. Orthoptera 12. Diptera. 

The objection to this system is that it separates the Coleoptera and 
Orthoptera, which have both mandibulate mouths, and which are in 
other respects nearly allied. The Parasita, Hemiptera, Neuroptera, 
and Lepidoptera have also each two distinct classes of mouth organs. 

At present I cannot but regard the characters of the mouth as 
insufficient for the distribution of the British insects into orders, 
although up to the time of Stephens, and in some instances up to the 
present, this mode of classification has been mainly adopted. In many 
of the various orders do we find both the haustellate and mandibulate 
characters, and if this rule be rigidly adhered to, it will result in the 
lepidopterous insects being placed in one division, while the larvae 



MosLEY : On Classification of British Insects. 



which produced them are placed in another, the imago having a hau- 
stellate mouth, and the larva a mandibulate one. 

The following arrangement of the orders of British winged insects, 
I think, will meet all the requirements of a collection arranged for 
public inspection, viz : — 

1. Hemiptera 5. Lepidoptera 

2. Orthoptera 6. Hymenoptera 
8. Coleoptera 7. Diptera 

4. Neuroptera. 

Now let us proceed to consider these various orders more particu- 
larly, and see what relation they bear one to another. The class 
Insecta, I think, should be begun by the Apterous division, say by the 
Anoplura (lice). Going backwards, we pass on (out of the insects) 
into the mites, spiders, and crustaceans ; and going forward we pass 
from the lice to the Thysamra^ and from them to the 

1st Ord., Hemiptera. — I place this order next to the Aptera, 
because their habits are somewhat similar, as regards the mouth and 
matamorphosis, and the wings of Hemiptera are very frequently 
either entirely wanting, or are only rudimentary. The order is 
generally divided into two sub- orders, sometimes ranked as distinct, 
but clearly so nearly allied as not to be distinctly separable. 

Sub-Ord., 1. Heteroptera. 2. Homoptera. 

The sub-order, Heteroptera, differs from the Homoptera in 
having the basal part of their fore-wings leathery, and the tips mem- 
branous. It is divided into two sections — 

Auracoriza^ or land-bugs, living upon various kinds of x^lants, 
and sucking their juices ; and 

Hydrocorizaj or water-bugs, of which examples may be found 
in every pond, the water boatman being a well-known 
example. 

This order is too extensive, and the species and genera too similar, to 
admit of further notice here. 

The Homoptera are divided by Westwooi into three primary 
sections : 

Sec. 1. Trimera^ in which the tarsi are 3-jointed. 
„ 2. Mmera, „ „ 2 

3. Monomer ay 1 ,? 

The Trimera include the family Cicadas, of which we have, I believe, 
only a single species {Cicada Angelica) in Britain. In foreign countries 



8 



The Naturalist. 



some of the species attain large size, and are remarkable for the 
development of their musical organs. 

The second British family of the section is the Cecropidce, which 
differs in having the antennae three-jointed. It includes the well- 
known frog-hopper, developed from the cuckoo-spit insect (Ttttigonia 
spumarid) and other allied forms. 

The second section, Dimera, includes the PsylUdce, or jumping plant- 
lice ; the Aphidce, or green-fly ; and the Aleyrodes^ or snow-flies. 
These live by sucking the juices of plants, and some of them are very 
injurious to our growing crops. 

The third section (Monomera), contains the coccus, or scale insects, 
of which we have some British species, and of which the cochineal 
and lac insects are exotic examples. The males have two wings, but 
the females are destitute of wings or other organs, and appear like a 
scale upon the stem of the plant they infest. The second section 
should be placed last, as they form a connection with the jumping 
Orthoptera. 

Ord. 2, Orthoptera. — That section or sub-order, which I place 
first, is the Saltatoria, or jumpers \ and the second, Cursoria, or 
runners; the first connect them with the jumping Homoptera, and 
the latter, with the running Coleoptera. 

The Saltatoria comprise the following families : — ¦ 

1. Achetidw^ or crickets, of which the house cricket {Acheta 

domestica), and the mole cricket {Qryllotalj^a vulgaris) are 
examples. 

2. Gryllidce, or grasshoppers. 

3. LocustidcB^ or locusts. 

The second sub-order, the Ciirsoria, include the cockroaches (Blatta) 
and the earwigs ; the latter being sometimes ranked as a distinct 
order, under the name of Euplexoptera, 

Finishing the Orthoptera with the earwig, brings us to the next-of- 
kin, which appears to me to be the Staphyliuidoe, in Ord. 3, Coleoptera ; 
yet to suggest an arrangement of this order of insects with the 
Staphylinidse at the head, I am afraid would be considered a very 
revolutionary measure by coleopterists. I am not sufficiently well 
versed in beetles to say what arrangement should follow, but the 
SilphidcB might come next, to which they are undoubtedly allied, from 
thence we might pass on to the types of the order, the Garabidae. 

Ord. 4, Neuroptera. — The passage from the Coleoptera to the 
Neuroptera is not so easy a matter, but as it is impossible to make an 



Short Notes and Queries. 



9 



unbroken line, it is not to be wondered that whatever arrangement 
we adopt, some breaks will occur. Perhaps among exotic species, the 
Zermetlna^ or white ants, woiild form the nearest allies to the beetles. 

The British species will begin with the family PsociD^, consisting 
of numerous minute insects found upon plants, and distinguished by 
the almost obsolete labial palpi, the 2-3-jointed tarsi, and long 
antennae. They somewhat resemble the Psyllidce, and are collected 
along with them, but the mouth part is differently constructed, 
consisting of jaws, and the neuration of the wings is differently 
arranged. 

(To he continued.) 



Notes on the Flora of Hodder-Dale. — In the Naturalist for Aug., 
1881, I gave a list of plants observed by me in Hodder-Dale which are 
not included in the list on pp. 277-8 of ^' West Yorkshire." I have now 
to add the following, which have been observed by me this year : — 
Gymnadenia conopsea, Habenaria chlorantha, Paris quadrifolia, Crypto- 
gramme crispa (on Catlow Fell^, Foly podium Fhegopteris, Equisetum 
sylvaticum, Barhula tortuosa, Hypnum jiuitans, Kantia Sprengelii, Sea- 
pania undidata, vars. speciosa and isoloha, Nees. I may add that Ruhus 
ChamcemoruSf recorded as growing on ^' Bowland Flatts," is also to be seen 
on the southern side of the dale on Croasdale and Lamb Hill fells, &c. — 
W. Fowler. 

Eagle Owls (Buteo maximus) breeding in Captivity. — Early in April 
I was informed that the eagle owls at Roundhay were showing signs of 
nidification, so 1 at once proceeded to the Park, where I learnt that one 
egg had been found on the I7th April, among the rustic work inside the 
cage. A second egg was laid on the floor on the 19th April, but the bird 
forsook this egg, and it was afterwards presented to me by Mr. Todd, 
the owner of the noble birds. On the 20th the female scraped together 
some hay in the corner of the cage, and began to sit, but owing to the 
fierceness of the birds it was impossible to ascertain the number of eggs 
under her until the 22nd, when Mr. Todd saw a third egg. I again 
visited the place on the 29th April, and found the female still faithfully 
fulfilling the duties of incubation ; and we began to entertain hopes of 
seeing a young eagle owl in down. The birds were excedingly fierce and 
noisy when their nest was approached, their throats swelling to the size of 
a turkey's egg, and a tremendous hooting commenced, which was con- 
tinued until the intruder retired. There are three owls in one cage. The 
two breeding birds were taken from their nest in 1878, and are four years 
old ; the other is a female, and was captured on Kombald's Moor, near 



10 



The Naturalist. 



Ilkley, in 1876. I left Leeds on the 1st of May, on a tour through the 
north-western fells, and on returnmg I was sorry to hear that some 
malicious person had broken into the room where the birds are kept, and 
carried off the contents of the nest, and thus put an end to our hopes and 
expectations. I doubt whether the rogue came off free without torn 
clothes and scratched hands. I examined two of the eggs ; they were not 
the typical shape, but were similar in size and shape to the eggs of the 
common fowl. The one which was given to me contained a pale yolk. A 
larger and more convenient place is now being built for these large, noble 
birds, and we hope that next spring they will meet with better success. — 
Walter Raine, Leeds, July 10th. 

The Nightingale at Scakborough. — I am informed by Mr. William 
Robinson, of Scarborough, who is quite familiar with the song of this 
bird, that he heard a nightingale singing near OHver's Mount, on the 
nights of the 10th and 11th of May last. Until the publication of the 

Handbook of Yorkshire Yertebrata," ^^five miles north of York " was 
stated, in books, to be the farthest north for this species. My investiga- 
tions for the Handbook enabled me to prove that the bird occurred much 
further north, and to state my opinion that it was gradually extending its 
range northwards up the vale of York, and along the coast, and I found 
Baldersby Park, near Thirsk, and Flamborough Head were, so far as I 
could ascertain, its most northern outposts in Great Britain. Now Scar- 
borough must be considered as such for the coast. — Wm. Eagle Clarke. 

Extraordinary Mortality amongst Diptera. — As I was walking 
down Park-bottom road, from Elland towards Brighouse, yesterday 
evening, the road, under the trees, was thickly strewed with flies like the 
sample I enclose. They were nearly all dead, or about 1 in 100 living. 
What is the name of the fly, and the cause of the mortality ? there were 
thousands. — C. C. Hanson, Greetland, near Halifax, July 13th, 1882. — 
[We submitted the flies to Mr. P. H. Meade, of Bradford, who replied 
as follows: — ^^The flies sent were specimens of Bibio Fomonce Fab. 
Many of the species of this family (Bibionidce) occasionally swarm in 
immense numbers, the cause of which is rather obscure. In the Entomo- 
logisVs Monthly Magazine for November, 1880, Mr. Douglas has published 
an account of an immense swarm of flies which invaded a ship whilst at 
sea ; these (some of which he forwarded to me), belonged to the same 
family though to a different genus {Dilophus vulgaris). The species of 
Bibio are said to feed, in the larva state, on the roots of grass, and seem 
to hatch out sometimes in great numbers at once. — Yours very truly, P. 
H. Meade, Bradford, July 5th, 1882."— Eds. Nat] 

British Association Meeting at Southa^ipton, and Local Scien- 
tific Societies. — Mr. W. G. Fordham has sent to us a number of papers 
relating to the Conference of Delegates of Local Scientific Societies, &c., 
to be held as above, and we desire to call the attention of all our local 
societies and others generally, to the very interesting features referred to 



Short Notes and Queries. 



11 



in these papers, which cannot fail to be of value to all our societies. 
According to the new minute of the British Association, both the presi- 
dent and secretary of any local scientific society, publishing transactions, 
or in his absence, a delegate representing him, may now be temporary 
members of the general committee, provided that such representative be 
a wxmher not an associate of the B. A. , and notice must be sent to the 
general secretary before the meeting. Mr. Fordham, whose address is 
Odsey Grange, Royston, Cambridgeshire, will be glad to send copies of 
these papers to the secretary of any local society requiring them. — Eds. 
Nat. 

OBITUARY.— By the death of William Talbot, of Mount Pleasant, 
Wakefield, v^hich took place on Monday, the 22nd of May, Yorkshire 
naturalists have lost one of their most valued comrades and earnest 
fellow-workers. For some time past, his health had completely broken 
down, probably the result of his occupation, so that the sad event was, in 
a sense, not unexpected. By occupation he was a painter, and he filled 
the office of master painter to the Wakefield House of Correction so long 
as it was under the control of the West Riding J ustices. On its being 
taken over by Her Majesty's Government a few years ago, Mr. Talbot 
was retired on a pension. In his leisure hours he was a keen and ardent 
naturalist, the special bent of his studies being in the direction of ornith- 
ology and entomology. In the latter science he formed an extensive 
collection of lepidoptera, but at the same time he did not neglect to 
collect specimens in other orders — particularly, hymenoptera, in which he 
materially assisted the late Mr. Frederick Smith, of the British Museum, 
both on his frequent visits to the Wakefield district, and by the collection 
of specimens for him. In ornithology Mr. Talbot will always be remem- 
bered for his admirable list of the ^' Birds of Wakefield," published in 
this journal, and afterwards reprinted as a separate work, copies of which 
he liberally bestowed upon his fellow-workers. His knowledge was 
sound, and his experience — the result of many years' field-work — was 
great. What he knew, he knew thoroughly, and he was never ashamed 
to confess his ignorance of what he did not know. Socially, he was 
emphatically one of Nature's gentlemen," kind, courteous, and afiable 
to a degree ; a man whom it was a pleasure to know, and whose friend- 
ship was something worth having. Of the West Riding Consolidated 
Naturalists' Society we believe that he was virtually the founder, but at 
all events he took an active part in its formation, and throughout its 
existence he was one of its steadiest and most loyal supporters. He 
showed a like interest in the movements which led to its reorganization 
under the title of Yorkshire Naturalists' Union," in 1877, and was 
unanimously selected as the first president of the Vertebrate Section of 
the Union, an office which he held for a year or two. We believe the last 
meeting of the Y.N.U. that he attended was the one at Barnsley and 
New Park Spring, on the 12th of June, 1880, since which date he has 



12 



The Naturalist. 



been riiucli confined to the house by ill health. Many are the pleasant 
days which his friends will recollect enjoying in his company, at Haw 
Park, and New Park Spring, and Woolley Edge, and many a pleasant 
place beside ; and it will be long before his place is adequately filled. 



ftatnfaU fox ^nuL 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
leveL 


Rain 
falh" 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1882. 


1881. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Bobson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

4 06 


22 


18-36 


* 14-35 


22 


1-10 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


5*25 


17 


27-02 


19-64 






Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


3-325 


19 


13-635 


tlO-515 


22 


1-060 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


3-780 


23 


15-760 


J14-073 


22 


1-090 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


3-93 


20 


14-35 


10-77 


26 


0-66 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


4-78 


20 


20-79 


15-51 


22 


1-46 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


3-21 


20 


15-04 


12-98 


22 


0-85 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


3-69 


17 


14-57 


9-83 


22 


0-70 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


3-34 


23 


13-14 


9-012 


9 


0-55 



* This is the average to date for 16 years, 1866-81. 
t Average of 28 years, 1853-62 and 1865-82. 
J Average of 13 years, 1870-82. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — At the meetings July 4th and 18th, 
reports of the sectional meetings were read, also accounts of the local 
excursions, with the various plants, insects, and birds observed. The 
society has organised one excursion monthly ; the June one was to New 
Park Spring and Dearne Valley, rich in warblers, including the nightin- 
gale, and some plants not commonly distributed, as Paris quadrifolia, 
Convallaria majalis, Nuphar lutea, and HoUonia pahistris. It is many 
years since the latter was found in the same valley, the railway workings 
having disturbed it ; the other two have only been re-discovered of late 
years. The ornithological observations were few, owing to Mr. Lister 
having recently been in London and neighbourhood, where the summer 
warblers were numerous. He counted eight nightingales within a small 
fringe of Epping Forest, in one hour's ramble ; near Colchester, Hamp- 
stead, Kew, and Chalford, they might be heard night and day. In 
Wakefield district it has been heard in three distinct localities. Other 



Reports of Societies. 



13 



migrants have been too numerous to keep account of. On the Dunford 
moors, the dipper and ring-ouzel (the last a migrant) were seen ; the 
sparrow-hawk seen at Rockley June 10, Stainborough, July 8. The heron 
kingfisher, snipes, and lapwings, have been noted. Mr. Hailstone 
writes (July 15th) — Eleven terns flew over Walton Lake from east to 
west.— T. L. 

Ilkley Scientific Club. — At a largely attended and successful meeting 
of ladies and gentlemen of Ilkley and neighbourhood, held on the 12th of 
May last, it was resolved — after listening to addresses delivered on behalf 
of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union by Messrs. C. H. Bothamley, F.C.S., 
and Wm. Denison Roebuck — to form a scientific club for Ilkley. Mr. 
F. W. Fison, M.A., F.C.S., was chosen as president, and Messrs. Yincent 
Taylor, B.A., and James Brodie, as secretaries. Yice-presidents were 
also chosen, and a committee including several ladies. Already a good 
number of members have been enrolled, and a fortnightly series of excur- 
sions are arranged for the summer months. The winter session is to be 
occupied by meetings for reading of papers, and exhibition of specimens. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Monthly 
meeting, June 26th, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper^ in the chair. — After 
the transaction of the ordinary business, the Rev. S. Fletcher Williams 
read a paper on Darwin and Darwinism," which was listened to with 
great interest. Mr. Williams sketched the life of Darwin, described his 
personal characteristics as a man, and reviewed the Darwinian doctrine of 
natural selection. During the conversazione Mr. B. Cooke exhibited 
insects collected during a Whitsuntide excursion to Sherwood Forest, 
including the rare Morddlistena abdominalis ; Mr. T. Yon Sobbe, a box 
of European lepidoptera ; Mr. W. Gardner, a box of Welsh mountain 
eoleoptera ; and the honorary secretary (Dr. Ellis), a smoky variety of 
Abraxas idmata captured at Ince Blundell. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — Meeting July 17th, Mr. Thos. 
Brittain, F.R.M.S., in the chair.— Mr. Ashton brought some fern fronds 
for identification, which came originally from Jersey, and proved to be a 
finely divided form of Asplenium lanceolaPum. Mr. Stanley exhibited a 
number of hepatics from Derbyshire, recently gathered. Mr. W. H. 
Pearson read a few notes on Conocephalus conticus and Preissia commutata^ 
and exhibited specimens. The latter species had recently been collected 
by Mrs. Perrin, in Cheedale, and by Mr. Holt near Buxton. This rather 
widely distributed species is not recorded for Derbyshire in the London 
catalogue. Mr. Pearson also brought specimens of Mylea Taylori, with 
colesules, collected recently by Mr. Geo. Stabler in Mardale. Mr. J. W. 
Atkinson shewed specimens of a micro-fungus, Nectria mammoidea — a 
recent species not described in Cook's Handbook. The specimens had 
been found by him on the dead stems of furze at Bowness, Windermere, 
May, 1882. — Thos. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 



14 



The Naturalist. 



OvENDEN Naturalists' Society.— Monthly meeting, June 24th., Mx*. 
J. Spencer in the chair. — The following botanical specimens, amongst 
others, were laid on the table : — Trientalis europoea, Polygala vulgaris, 
Geum rivaUy Luzula sylvatica, Pinguicula vulgaris, Rhinanthus crista-galU, 
Sauicula europoea, Myosotis palustris, Lactuea virosa, Lysimackia nemo- 
rumy Geranium pratense, Polypodium pliegopteris, &c. — Joseph Ogden, 
Sec. 

Wakefield Naturalists' and Philosophical Society. — On June 
6th this society visited Woolley Edge, WooUey Hall Gardens, the Park 
and district, accompanied by representatives from Huddersfield and 
Heckmondwike Naturalists' Societies, and Wakefield Paxton Society. A 
fair number of specimens were collected in most departments, but none 
of them new to the district, or indicating any new feature of distribution. 

Meeting, June 7th, the president (Mr. Joseph Wainwright, F.L.S.)in 
the chair. — Mr. Spurling exhibited the following from Haw Park : — 
Imagos : M. hastata, T. hiundularia, A. mendica, G. fluctuosa, B. rhom- 
hoidaria, and larva of 0. antiqua ; Mr. J. Toms, a quantity of 
fossil ferns from the coal measures in the neighbourhood ; Mr. J. 
Wilcock, several species of coleoptera taken the preceding day at 
Woolley ; the secretary, four species of beetles (alive), kindly forwarded 
him by Mr, G. T. Porritt, F.L.S., of Huddersfield, who had taken them 
at Wicken Fen, Cambridgeshire, including Melosoma Tremulce) Fabr.y 
GJirysomela fastuosa. Lin. — B. W. 

Y.N. U. Ramble to Snaith. —The route taken by the coleopterists was 
by. way of the carrs to Pollington, where a few somewhat scarce northern 
insects were taken (particularly in the Hydradephaga) out of a drain 
across the fields. The umbriferous plants around Balne Pond were also 
very productive ; four species of Phyllotreta and two species of Donacia, 
with a number of others, were taken by sweeping. Among the stones 
along the banks of the Knottingley and Goole canal, a few specimens of 
Glivinia fossor and collaris, with one specimen of Drypta dentata, Ross., 
were amongst the Geodephaga taken there. Along Hagg-lane to Snaith 
a number of good things turned up, including, at the latter place, Ghry- 
soynela fucata, Fabr., Goccinella Uf-giittata, Linn. ; and at the former 
Attellabus curcidionoideSy Gartrophyla polygoni, Linn., Gassida equestris, 
Fabr., and Fyrocroa serraticornis, Scop. In all, 69 species were taken 
and two varieties. — E. B. Wrigglesworth. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — The third meeting for 1882 was 
held at Scarborough on the 15th of July, for the investigation of the 
shore and neighbourhood, and permission had been given by Lords 
Downe and Londesborough to visit their respective estates. The following 
parties were formed : — 1. Mr. Massee led a party to the rocks on the 
north beach, where numerous species of algse were obtained. Had the 
weather been propitious, this party was to have spent some portion of its 



Reports of Societies. 



15 



time in dredging, for which purpose the Mayor had kindly placed his 
steam-yacht at its disposal. 2. A party led by Mr. W. Robinson pro- 
ceeded to Raincliffe and Seamer Moor, to Forge Yalley and Yedmondale. 
3. The Rev. E. Maule Cole and Mr. J. H. Phillips led a party of geologists 
to Gristhorpe, returning by the coast. 4. Mr. J. H. Rowntree led a 
small party of entomologists to the cliffs at Barniston. At the general 
meeting the chair was occupied by Mr. Thomas Hick, B.A., B.Sc, one 
of the vice-presidents. On calling the roll it was found that members 
representing the following incorporated societies were present : — Barnsley, 
Dewsbury, Driffield, Huddersfield, Leeds, Ripon, and Scarborough. 
The list of new subscribers since the Snaith meeting included the names 
of Mr. George Winter, of Don caster, and Mr. E. Y. Thompson, of Scar- 
borough. Mr. Geo. T. Porritt, F.L.S., proposed that the best thanks of 
the meeting be given to Messrs. Massee and Rowntree for their efficient 
services as local secretaries ; also to the leaders of parties, and to Lords 
Londesborough and Downe for permission to visit their estates. Mr. 
Wm. Eagle Clarke reported, on behalf of Mr. Butterell, for the Concho- 
logical Section, that he and Mr. Ross had found 23 land and fresh-water 
shells, and about 10 marine shells. The best land-shells were Limax 
marginatus, Helix nemoralis, var. hybrida, H. fusca, and Cyclostoma 
elegans. The fresh-water species were — Bythinia tentaculata, Planorbis 
albus, P. corneus, and Limnea stagnalis ; the land species, Limax agrestis, 
L. marginatus. Zonites cellarius, Z. fulvus, Z. nitidulus, Z. purus, Helix 
aspersa, H. nemoralis, ditto, var. hortensis and hybrida, H. arbustorum, 
H. hispida, H. fusca, H. virgata, H. caperata, Bulimus obscurus, Clau- 
silia rugo^a, C. laminata, Cyclostoma elegans ; marine genera, Littorina, 
Pholas, Patella, Purpura, Trochus and Chiton. Mr. Porritt, for the 
Entomological Section, reported that the rain had considerably interfered 
with collecting operations, but that Messrs. J. H. Rowntree of Scarborough, 
N. F. Dobree of Beverley, and himself had taken the following, amongst 
others, on the north cliffs : — Toxocampa pastinum, Gnophos obscurata, 
Strenia clathrata (plentiful and very fine), . Pterophorus trigonodactylus, 
and P. osteodactylus. Mr. Massee, for the Botanical Section, reported 
that, notwithstanding the unfavourable weather, the section did a fair 
amount of work ; 350 species of phanerogams, and about 50 cryptogams, 
were collected or seen. Amongst unusual plants exhibited at the sectional 
meeting were Lathyrus sylvestris, Epipactis palustris, Smilacina bifolia, 
Torrubia militaris, Mitrula paludosa, and Agaricus (Omphalia) oniscus. 
The two last, discovered by Mr. Middleton, are new to the district, and, 
so far as is known, to the county. Mr. J. H. Phillips reported for the 
Geologicical Section, that the party (led by Pvcv. E. M. Cole, M.A., and 
himself) alighted at Gristhorpe station, near Filey, and walked to the 
summit of the lofty cliffs, where — after a pleasing survey of the coast — 
they descended to the beach, where there is a good display of the drift 
resting in descending order on the Calcareous grit, Oxford clay, Kelloway 
rock, shales, and false-bedded sandstones. These sections, more or less, 



16 



The Naturalist. 



are continued to Lou's " Nab. The millepore ridge of rocks, at low 
water, are seen in this bay to great advantage, but the advancing tide as 
we passed was fast submerging them. Passing round Lou's " Nab, we 
quickly came upon the site of the great fault, which is here very per- 
ceptible. It is a remarkable dislocation. On the left of the line of fault, 
the lower part of the Oxford clay is opposed to the bottom of the calca- 
reous grit on the right ; whilst the Kelloway rock on the right meets the 
carbonaceous sandstones and shales on the left. The extent of the 
dislocation is about 140 feet. Just beyond, northwards, is one of the 
finest sections in the kingdom of the Calcareous grit, Oxford clay, and 
Kelloway rock ; whilst the Cornbrash is shown at the base by a dwarf 
fringe of rocks near the line of high-water mark, with false-bedded sand- 
stones and shales overlying the millepore bed. Owing to the advancing 
tide, we had but a brief period left us to hammer out of the cornbrash a 
few of its characteristic fossils. Gristhorpe Bay, with its island rock- 
plant beds, and bold cliffs, presents a fine study for the young and enter- 
prising geologist, for its various strata consist of vast multitudes of shells, 
ferns, Zamia, lycopodiacise, and thin laminae of coal, and the plant-bed 
is full of fossils guarded by the millepore bed. Here our happy labours 
were compelled to be terminated owing to the tide, and a drenching 
shower of rain overtook us whilst ascending the cliffs above Cayton 
Waterworks ; but the enchanting walk to Scarborough, with the fine bay 
on the one hand, and the bold headland of Oliver's Mount on the other, 
amply compensated for those little drawbacks. The imperfect specimens 
of fossils we were able to procure — and so very speedily — were Avi- 
cula Bradenburiensis, Grevillia aviculoides, Othea, Myacetes recurvus, 
Ammonites convolvulus. Mr. Wm. Eagle Clarke, for the Vertebrate 
Section, said nothing could be done on account of the weather, and the 
only birds noticed were the cormorant, blackheaded gull and various other 
gulls, sandmartin, swift, whinchat, stonechat, redstart, lesser redpoll, 
greenfinch, wheatear, and jay. — A vote of thanks to the chairman 
concluded the proceedings. — W. E. C. 

Beverley Report. — Not knowing of. any previous record of the 
occurrence of Tephrosia consonaria in Yorkshire (see Nat. VII. y 206), I 
wrote to Mr. N. F. Dobree, asking him kindly to make inquiries 
respecting the insect named as that species at the Beverley Meeting of 
the Union. Mr. Dobree tells me (as I suspected) that the specimen was 
wrongly named, and was indeed a much commoner species. I have little 
doubt, also, that Coremia munitata should be omitted from that day's 
captures, as, even if it occurs at Beverley at all. May 29th would, I think, 
be too early for it to be on the wing. And were not the specimens 
recorded as Tephrosia crepuscularia really T. biundularia 1 — Geo. T. 
PoRRiTT, July, 1882. 

• [Erratum. — On p. 205, vol. vii., line 6 from bottom — for dogger," 
read marlstone of middle lias."] 



DARWIN AND DARWINISM. 

By the Rev. S. Fletcher Williams. 

Kead before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society, June 25th, 1882. 
Whatever view may be taken of the Philosophical theory that 
bears the name of Darwin, its strongest opponents freely acknowledge 
the candour of its author, and the force and ingenuity of the arguments 
by which it is supported. The publication, less than a quarter of a 
century ago, of the ^- Origin of Species, by means of Natural 
Selection," caused a revolution in the views held as to the origin of 
life. Fifteen years before that date, the "Yestiges of the Natural 
History of Creation," restated in an attractive form, the Lamarckian 
doctrine that existing forms of life have descended from pre-existing 
forms ; and that work gave rise to a long and bitter controversy. This 
controversy had nearly spent itself when Mr. Darwin, avoiding the 
mistakes of the " Vestiges," came forward with his now celebrated 
theory, that existing forms have been gradually developed by natural 
selection" and the " struggle for life;" or, as Mr. Herbert Spencer 
puts it, the survival of the fittest." The re-statement of views that 
are as old as philosophy itself, supported as these were with great 
ingenuity of argument, and by the aid of a vast store of scientific 
information, most skilfully used, gave a fresh impetus to the 
controversy, and turned it into a new and unexpected channel. It 
was seen and felt that Charles Darwin was a man of no ordinary 
power. His views at once commanded attention, and attention soon 
grew into admiration or alarm, according to the views of those who 
studied them. There was one peculiarity in the controversy. Mr. 
Darwin wrote as a naturalist, and supported his hypothesis by an 
appeal to the well-ascertained facts of a department of knowledge in 
which he has probably an unequalled mastery, while most of the 
criticism was directed against the hypothesis, and left the facts 
untouched. Himself no controversialist, he continued unobtrusively 
to apply himself to the work of observation and the accumulation of 
further stores of knowledge, and allowed the din of controversy to 

expend itself without contributing to it a single word.* His letters 
N.S., Vol. viii., Sept., 1882. 

^ * There is no trace in his writings of the storm to which his doctrine gave 
rise, for he serenely went on with his self-appointed task, leaving the result to 
he decided, not under the hasty impulses of the moment, hut with the calmer 
judgment of mature reflection. 



18 



Thk Naturalist. 



at the time are said by Professor Asa Gray to testify that he viewed 
the public discussion with a sense of amazed wonder at an unexpected 
notoriety. Maintaining through it all the kindliness, unaffectedness, 
and simple-heartedness which made him one of the most loveable of 
men, it is said that whenever he came into correspondence or contact 
with any opponent, he never failed to make a friend of him. 

Looking at Charles Darwin simply as a man, how many times in 
England, in Europe, in America, can you match him ? Simple- 
hearted as a child, singularly modest and unassuming, a man who 
may be taken as a model in his personal character, in his home 
life, in his life as a citizen, — a man who has made the single-hearted 
and clear-eyed pursuit of truth the one work of his life, and who has 
shown a singularly pure and unbiassed and unpartisan devotion to 
that truth. He did not seek to build up his own ideas or to glorify 
himself, but he looked calmly and dispassionately at the subjects with 
which he dealt, searching simply to find out the truth, and setting 
down the results in direct and lucid terms. I wish that those who 
claim to be holier than he, could really establish their right to stand 
on a level with him in this marvellous characteristic of the earnest, 
pure-minded seeker after truth. Even they must admit it is well tbat 
the change of lease in philosophical natural history which had to be 
made in their generation should have been dominated — though it has 
not been wholly controlled — by a spirit so truthful and single, and a 
judgment so calm and well-balanced. 

Let me give an illustration of the extent to which he carried this. 
The " Origin of Species," his great epoch-making book, contains in 
itself the hint — more than the hint, the clear statement — of every 
single criticism that has ever been made on it. He overlooked, he 
covered up, none of the difficulties that stood against his theory. He 
put the weapons into the very hands of his enemies, and said, See, 
here is this theory ; such things make for it, such things make 
against it. Destroy it if you can." And this he said in no defiant 
tone, but only as one who should say, ^*If this be not a part of the 
eternal truth, it ought to be destroyed ; and, though my life-work be 
lost as the result, yet I will help you in its destruction." How many 
men advocating moral, religious, sociological, political theories of any 
kind have ever been so utterly candid and fair as this ? So much 
simply to indicate the kind of man he was. 

Charles Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, in February, 1809, and 
when we look at his ancestry, and see the stock from which he 



Williams : Darwix and Darwinism. 



19 



descended, we are compelled to tliink of him as a conspicuous illus- 
tration of one of the more important parts of his own theoretical and 
scientific work. Both his father and his grandfather were noted men 
of science ; their fame, indeed, eclipsed by the greater brightness of 
his, and yet men noteworthy enough to be reckoned as helping to 
make up the scientific developement of the life of England. All 
these — his grandfather, his father, and himself — were members one 
after another of the Royal Society of England : perhaps the only 
case in English history where men in the line of direct descent 
have been held worthy of that honour. His mother was a descendant 
of the family of the Wedgwood's, so noted in connection with the 
manufacture of pottery. Young Darwin received his preparatory 
education at Shrewsbury School, under Dr. Butler, afterwards Bishop 
of lachfield. Thence he went to Edinburgh University, where he 
studied two years ; where, so far as memoranda can guide us, he 
evinced a decided inclination for the study of Natural History, 
directing his attention more particularly to marine zoology, and 
where he read at least two papers on subjects connected with his 
favourite study, before the Plinean Society, which just then came into 
being. From Edinburgh he went to Christ College, Cambridge, where 
he graduated at the age af twenty-two. So far young Darwin had 
acquitted himself creditably, but with no special mark, at his various 
seats of learning : but now, another and different sphere of education 
presented itself, and Darwin embraced the offered opportunity. 

In the autumn of 1831, a ship was starting on a voyage round 
the world ; and that voyage has been made famous, and will be 
famous in all coming time, simply by the fact that the young man of 
twenty-two volunteered to accompany the trip in the capacity of 
naturalist. It was characteristic of the young man's zeal for the 
study of natural science that he served without salary, and paid a 
portion of his own expenses, on condition that he should have the 
right of making what use he pleased of the zoological, botanical, and 
geological collections. Under these arrangements, then, at the age 
of twenty-two, he sailed in the " Beagle," made a voyage round the 
world, and was absent from England for five years. Was that a time 
lost ? It was a seed-time preliminary to a fruitful and precious 
harvest. In the progress of this voyage he was much struck by 
some peculiar relations that he discovered between the plant and 
animal life of the Gallapagos Islands, and similar life on the continent 
of South America ; and then and there was planted the seed from 
which has sprung the great and mighty development of his thought, 



20 



The Naturalist. 



which has changed, and is still more to change, the life of the world. 
After five years he returned, in 1836, nursing in his mind this 
fruitful thought, which, as I have said, was to be the seed of all his 
future life. He published several works as the result of the discov- 
eries and observations made during this voyage. His " Journal of 
Researches into the Natural History and Geology " of the counties he 
visited, has been pronounced the most entertaining book of genuine 
travels ever written," and it at once carried the author's name far 
beyond the comparatively narrow limits of scientific fame ; but while 
this and subsequent publications prepared scientific circles to expect 
something good at his hands, there was no public trace yet, nor for 
years, of that which was to create an impression at once so deep, so 
wide, and so immediate. 

In 1839 Mr. Darwin married his cousin, Miss Emma Wedgwood, 
grand-daughter of Josiah Wedgwood ; and in 1842 went to live at 
Down, near Bromley, in Kent, where he resided throughout his 
subsequent life. He has had a family of seven — five sons and two 
daughters. Several of his sons have already acquired some dis- 
tinction, having largely assisted him in the preparation of his works, 
and in the investigations on which they are based. More than one 
of them has made valuable contributions to science ; and the eldest 
son, George H. Darwin, is an examiner for the Mathematical Tripos 
at Cambridge, and an occasional contributor to scientific and other 
magazines. 

Darwin's life was remarkably uneventful so far as personal incidents 
of any special interest to the general public aie concerned; but it 
may be said of him that in the recesses of his closet he was turning 
the intellectual world upside down. The dates of the production of 
his numerous works are the principal milestones to mark the period 
of his long and laborious career. The work he has accomplished 
could have oaly been got through by a most methodical devotion and 
the firmest determination of purpose. In a cursory and sketchy paper 
like this there is no room — and indeed for the present audience there 
is no need — to sketch even the outlines of that work on the direct lines 
of his theory, as contained in the series of volumes on " The Origin of 
Species," " Variations of Animals and Plants under Domestication," 
^^The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals," The Descent 
of Man," and " Selection in Eelation to Sex." And still more space 
would be required to specify the topics and their treatment, which fill 
a subsidiary series of volumes, such as ^' The Fertilization of Orchids 



Williams : Darwin and Dauwinism. 



21 



by Insects/' "The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants/' 
^^The Effects of Cross and Self-Fertilization/' "The Different 
Forms of Flowers/' (viewed in reference to their relation to insects), 
" The Power of Movement in Plants/' and, lastly, " The Formation 
of Mould through the Action of Worms," published only a few 
months ago. In any adequate pourtrayal of Darwin's scientific 
productions all these should have particular mention, for they are 
very characteristic of his genius and of his methods. Since all the 
works I have mentioned have been brought out within twenty-five 
years, it might seem that their author had given most of his time to 
book-writing ; yet this would be wide of the mark. Darwin was 
pre-eminently an investigator — hardly less so in the production of the 
earlier than of the later works. But those of the second list are 
models of acute and pains-taking investigation, inspired and fertilized 
by ideas. The amount of prolonged observation, watchful care, and 
tedious experiment they have demanded, is as wonderful as the skill 
in devising simple but effective methods of research is admirable. 

For the production of these results, one would say that genius and 
industry must have been seconded by abundant leisure and robust 
health. Fortunately Darwin could command his time ; but from the 
day on which he set sail for South America in the " Beagle " to the 
day of his death he was a suffering invalid, being, as it were, under 
chronic sea-sickness. We are told that the day in which he could 
accomplish two hours of work was counted a good one ; and there 
were very many in which nothing could be attempted. 

Perhaps even more than method and concentration were required, 
especially in the case of a man who had devoted his life to such 
researches and studies as those on which Darwin's reputation rests. 
He could not have achieved the work with which his name is asso- 
ciated had he gone into the usual round and whirl of society " ; 
this, so far as we can learn, he did not do. This does not imply that 
he was unsocial — far from it : Carlyle describes him as "a charming 
talker and companion "—but only that he did not throw away his 
time and energies upon companions or companionships of a trivial or 

dissipating nature. A friend who knew him well, writes : " Darwin 

has to a large extent eschewed general society, in which he had 
learned that there was more of noise and pretence than of calm 
wisdom and substance, and has almost wholly kept himself apart 
from public appearance ; so much so, indeed, that you might search 
the journals of the last thirty years without often finding his name in 



22 



TnK Natures [1ST. 



connection with the so-called great causes or " isms " of that long 
stretch of time." The same friend adds : — " This recluseness, while 
no doubt partly forced upon him by the exacting nature of the 
investigations he has been constantly carrying on, has been also due 
to some extent to a bodily infirmity under which he has laboured 
during the greater part of his literary career." 

But, however Darwin may have been absorbed in his speculations, 
he was not left in undisturbed quietude. It could not be. He had 
to pay at least part of the price of greatness. If he would write and 
publish books which stirred the mind and heart of men in all parts of 
the world as with the sound of a trumpet, it was in the nature of 
things, and inevitable, that at least an echo should come back upon 
him. To say nothing of private praise from friends in all parts of 
the world, and, not least, from the United States, in 1853 the Koyal 
Society awarded him their Royal medal, and in 1804 the Copley medal. 
In 1859 the Geological Society awarded him the Wollaston medal, 
while foreign Governments and societies have at various times 
acknowledged his distinguished services in various departments of 
scientific research and knowledge. In the November of 1877 the 
University of Cambridge rather tardily conferred on him the 
honorary degree of LL.D. At the dinner given at Cambridge the 
same evening in honour of the event, Professor Huxley, who replied 
for Darwin (now Dr. Darwin), referred, in pleasant badinage, to the 
University as reserving its highest^ honour until all other distinctions 
had been heaped upon Mr. Darwin, " that its own chaplet might 
crown the whole, and not be covered up." On the same occasion 
Professor Huxley spoke of Darwin as the foremost amongst men of 
science, with one exception, since the days of Aristotle. In the 
course of the same year Darwin received what must have been to him 
a more flattering compliment. On his sixty- ninth birthday he was 
presented with an album — a magnificent folio — bound in velvet and 
silver, containing the photographs of 154 men of science in Germany. 
These included many of the best known and most highly honoured 
names in Europe. He also received on the same occa^sion, from 
Holland, an album with the photographs of 217 distinguished pro- 
fessors and men of science in that country. In returning thanks for 
these unique marks of appreciation, Darwin wrote : — I suppose 
every worker at science occasionally feels depressed, and doubts 
whether what he has published has been worth the labour which it 
has cost him ; but for the remaining years of my life, whenever I 
want cheering, I will look at the portraits of my distinguished 



Williams : Uakwix and Darwinism. 

co-workers in the field of science, and remember their generous 
sympathy." 

It was in 1844, I believe, that Darwin wrote out a little sketch, 
which formed the foundation of The Origin of Species " — not at all 
for publication, but simply as a nucleus, or crystallizing centre around 
which to group his observations, and to make the basis of his study. 
It was not till 1859 that he published the great work on which his 
fame will rest. And here is an illustration of that singular fairness 
and earnest search for truth to which I have referred. He did not 
leap into print with a guess ; but, after he believed that he had found 
the truth concerning the life of the world and of man, he studied and 
thought and observed, and gathered new facts and new arguments for 
long years, that he might be sure, as far as it is possible to attain 
certainty, that he had attained the truth. As an illustration of this 
same spirit, which is really the spirit of science, and which I believe 
to be inherently and essentially religious, as all humble truth-seeking 
of necessity must be — take the case of Newton. Newton conceived 
his theory of gravitation, and for sixteen years studied and gathered 
facts, arguments, and illustrations, before he ventured to give it to 
the world. And Mr. Darwin would have waited and studied years 
longer than he did, had it not been for the fact that Mr. Alfred 
Eussell Wallace (whose name will always stand as sharing the honour 
with Darwin), while exploring the islands of the Malay Archipelago, 
had come to the same conclusions and arrived independently at the 
same theories with Darwin. Mr. Wallace embodied his theory in a 
paper, which he forwarded for communication to the Linnean 
Society. And here I may notice a beautiful episode of scientific 
fairness. The nature of Mr. Wallace^s paper having been ascertained 
by certain of the Fellows of the Society, who were also friends of 
Darwin, and who knew that for several years he had been elaborating 
and working out in detail the same theory, they arranged that a 
paper should be communicated by Darwin at the meeting of the 
Linnean Society at which Mr. Wallace's paper fell to be read, so that 
in this way the question of priority as to the authorship of the theory 
of "natural selection" might be left for future settlement. Mr. 
Wallace was entirely satisfied, and has handsomely admitted that 
Darwin had propounded the theory years before it had been suggested 
to his attention. 

Darwin then wrote out and gave to the world his " Origin of 
Species." He had wrought more completely, much more grandly, 



24 



The Naturalist. 



than he himself was aware. He found that his arguments and the 
clearness of his presentation had been so remarkable, that the world, 
in a brief space of time, considering the revolution involved, was 
converted to his theory. 

(To he continued,) 



ON THE CLASSIFICTION OF BRITISH INSECTS. 



By S. L. Mosley, Huddersfield. 



(Concluded.) 

The next family is the Perlida^ or stone flies. In this family the 
fore and hind wrings are of nearly equal length, and the abdomen has 
two antennee-like projections at the end. 

The third family is the Epheineridce, or may-flies, distinguished from 
the last by the very short antennae, the small hind wings, and by the 
long slender filaments at the extremity of the body, which are some- 
times three in number. 

The fourth family is the Libellulidce, or dragon-flies, well known to 
every collector of insects. 

The fifth family is the Hemerobiida^ or lace-winged flies, of which 
Chrysopa pe7da^ a pale-green delicate insect with metallic eyes, found in 
woods, is well known. 

The family Sialidce consists of a few species, and have aquatic larvae. 

The family Panorpidcs, or scorpion-flies, have black spots on their 
wings, and the males are armed at the extremity of the body wdtli 
scorpion-like pincers. 

The second sub-order of Neuroptera, or distinct order, whichever 
you like to call it, is the Trichoptera, the well known caddis-worm 
flies. They are very similar in their appearance and habits, and seem 
all unitable under one general class. 

Ord. 5, Lepidoptera. — The Trichoptera seem to unite the 
Neuroptera with the Lepidoptera, and the transmission is most 
complete, if we begin the latter with Acentropm niveus, but this, as in 
the case of the Coleoptera, would no doubt meet with little favour 
from specialists, they are so accustomed to begin their cabinet with 
Papilio MacJiao7i^ that I am afraid it would be difficult to persuade 
them otherwise ; yet Maehaon can have no connection with any other 



MosLEY : On Classification ov British Insects. 25 



insect in any^ther order. It is the old Linnean idea of placing the 
type at the head. To effect an alteration of this kind needs no 
very great alteration in the arrangement of the various groups ; the 
groups themselves need only be differently placed in relation one to 
the other, for some of them, like the Geometriua and Toi'tricina, are 
very natural, while others, like the Nocturni, are very unnatural, and 
require re-arrangement. In a short paper like this, where I can 
give only the merest outline of the system, it is impossible to go into 
minute detail ; but whether the arrangement of the Lepidoptera be 
altered or not, the natural place of that order seems to be between the 
Trichoptera and the Hymenoptera. 

Ord. 6, Hymenoptera. — The Hymenoptera are divided into two 
sub-orders, the Terebrantia and the Aculeata. The first family 
of the Terebrantia is the TeniliredinidcB^ or saw-flies, and their larvae 
at once suggest a very close relationship with the last order, the 
Lepidoptera. This class of insects is too well known among 
entomologists to need any description ; the gooseberry grub is a very 
common example. 

The second family of Terebrantia is the Slrcidce^ consisting of but 
few species in Britain, similar to that large and attractive insect 
Sirex gigas. 

The third family is the Cynipidce^ or gall-flies, of which we have 
many species in Britain, all of them small, and producing woody 
excrescences upon the leaves, bark, or roots of plants. 

The next family consists of but a few species, small insects, and 
parasites upon cockroaches. They are remarkable for having a very 
slender abdomen springing from the back. The family is called 
EvaniidcB. 

The family IchnmmonidcB is of large extent, though the insects 
comprising it, are generally comparatively small. Their general form 
is known to members of this Society either friendly or otherwise, 
perhaps too often the latter. 

The Chrysididce, or ruby-tailed flies, come nearest to the true bees 
and wasps, in the nests of some of which they are parasitic. The 
commonest species, Chrysis ignitis, may be found sunning itself upon 
walls in very hot weather, or dug from the nests of the sand wasps. 

The second sub order, Aculeata, comprises the Fossores^ sand and 
ground wasps, the ants, the true wasps, and the bees. 

Ord. 7, Diptera. — The representatives of the bees among the 
Diptera will be found in the genus BombyliuSy or humble-bee flies, 



The 



Na.tukai;i8t. 



and these should succeed the last group of Hymenoptera, to which 
these, as well as the Tabauiidce^ assimilate in the structure of the 
mouth. Then follow the ^Aniscidce^ Syrphidoe^ and other groups of 
this distinct order. 

In making this rapid sketch, of what I should propose as an 
arrangement of insects, I have only been able to take the most 
skipping glance at the various orders, and point out, where and how 
one might be joined to another. I do it because I think there needs 
to be some settled and accepted arrangement of the various orders of 
British insects. The time is not far distant, I think, when entomology 
shall be an accepted science, and shall form a part of our national 
education, and then, if not now, will be demanded a classification of 
British insects. Typical collections are the things which will be found 
most useful in instructing young people in the mysteries of the insect 
world. And not only to them, but even to professed entomologists 
such collections are always of great utility. These collections should 
be formed in every public museum, in every scientific institution, and 
in every school, for a knowledge of the insect world is of far greater 
importance than much that is taught now under the name of 
education. 



Lepidoptera in Ireland. — Having just returned from my usual 
holiday in Ireland^ which I always spend in entomology, I send a few 
rough notes of my doings. I have to add the same sad tale as others. 
My object in choosing the end of June and the beginning of July was to 
take B. furfurana and a beautiful variety of H. stagnalis, but when I 
reached the hunting grounds they were all under water, and I only 
succeeded in capturing very old specimens of the former, and none of the 
hydrocampa. The only thing I worked at night was the flower of the 
woodbine, which is generally very attractive ; but this year, with the 
exception of a few of the commonest moths, yielded little beyond P. iota, 
V-aureimiy festncce, the latter terribly worn. C. lickenaria, which is 
generally fairly plentiful, was entirely absent, as also Sesia hemheciformis. 
I saw two types of D. Barrettii, taken at Howth, but I was not successful 
in my attempts there, as I came away, after a long day's work, with little 
or nothing. The strangest thing 1 saw was on July 3rd, about 11-30 
a.m., A. cardamines, which seems to point to a second brood. Altogether 
the season seems to me to be one of the worst for entomologists, and we 
must only hope for better luck next time." — G. C. B. Madden, 
Armitage Bridge Vicarage, Huddersfield. 



Rainfall fok July. 



27 



Scoparia conspicualis and Acronycta cdni at Edlington Wood. — 
This morning I received a few specimens of S. conspicualis from Mr. W. 
Prest, who had taken them near York. I did not previously know the 
species, but on opening the box, saw directly that it was perfectly 
familiar to me ; and on looking over my store boxes I at once picked out 
several good specimens, and some inferior ones. I took them certainly 
two, probably three years ago, in Edlington Wood, near Doncaster, 
where I am pretty sure I have seen the species each season since, but 
have always passed it over as a form of amhigualis I am also inclined 
to think I saw it at Grassington on the Union's excursion there, the last 
Bank Holiday, but did not box a specimen. If any member brought 
away from there any doubtful Scoparia, I should much like to see it. 
On the 5th of the present month I found a larva of A. alni, on the upper 
side of an oak leaf in Edlington Wood. It has fed well, and is now 
evidently full grown, and about ready for spinning up. — Geo. T. 
PoRRiTT, August 17th, 1882.. 

Additions to West-Riding Alg^. — As far as I know, the following 
algae which I have recently collected, are not recorded for the West- 
Riding : Sirogoniitm sticticumj K. ; Cosmarium Holmieri, Sundell, and 
Staurastrum meriani, Reinsch, from Shipley Glen ; (Edogonium conca- 
tenatiim, Hass. , and Cosmarium Iceve, Rabenh. from near Bradford ; 
Zonotrichia Jluviatilis, Rabenh. from Malham ; and Calothrix Wrangelii, 
Ag., on rocks in the stream at Ingleton. — Wm. West, Bradford. 

Erratum. — At page 16, for Ion's Nab," read Yon's Nab. 



Rainfall Jxtl^. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
leveL 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1882. 


1881. 


Fall. 


HuuDEKSFiELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

3 00 


29 


21-36 


* 17-22 


5 


0-470 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


4-46 


27 


31-48 


23-66 






Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


3-040 


25 


16-635 


tl2-991 


13 


0-340 


HoRSFORTH . . . (James Fox) 


350 


4-640 


28 


20-400 


$17-228 


7 


0-470 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


3-02 


25 


17-37 


12-17 


6 


0-43 


Ingbirchworth (do.) ,. , 


853 


4-44 


30 


25-23 


19-30 


2 


0-64 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


3-49 


23 


18-53 


14-31 


6 


0-50 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


3-69 


17 


14-57 


9-83 


22 


0-70 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


1-97 


22 


11-172 


15-11 


27 


0-35 



* This is the average to date for 16 years, 1866-81. 
t Average of 28 years, 1853-62 and 1865-82. 
$ Average of 13 years, 1870-82. 
* * Have never had so many rainy days in one month before.— J. W.R 



^i^porfg of Sorictics. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — At the meetings of August 1st, T. 
Lister in the chair, and August 15th, Dr. W. J. Lancaster, the president, 
in the chair, reports were made by the various sections. The monthly- 
excursions were productive of good results, which will appear in the next 
quarter's ^^Transactions." The quarterly Transactions to the close of 
June 30th, were laid on the table to be presented to each member and 
corresponding society. It is a painstaking report. The entomological 
section reports an unsuccessful season on account of cold wet nights. 
The only moths worth reporting are Cymatophora flactuosay June 6th, at 
Lunn Wood ; Procris statices found for the first time in this locality in a 
field adjoining New Park Spring, June 15th, by the secretary, W. E. 
Brady ; Cymatophora jiuctiiosa again taken June 16th ; Asthena sylvata, 
Melanippe hastata, Numeria pnlveraria at New Park Spring ; Notodonta 
dictcBoides, Venusia camhricaria and two more C. fliictuosa at Wharn- 
clifFe. The botanical section (T. Pose, secretary), gives a long list of 
plants found, drawn up by Messrs. F. Batley and W. Hemingway, for 
which space cannot be afforded in the Naturalist. The geological section 
found in the beds of boulder clay of a dark tenacious character, re-exposed 
in the cutting of the Barnsley Coal Railway, at the bridge carrying over 
the Barnsley and Wakefield Poad the following rocks : — Sandstones and 
shales with scratches, coals, do. — ganister, mountain limestone, Silu- 
rian grits, limestones with remains of encrinital stems, greenstone, green 
slate several varieties, both much rounded and weathered, also Hematite 
iron ore. Specimens of all the above are in the museum. A bed of 
yellow clay has been observed at various points between Smithies and 
Poystone ; the mass of granite at the latter place has been twice visited, 
being discovered by Professor Green. The following fossils were brought 
from the workings on the Hull and Barnsley Pailway, near Brierley, 
Sphe7iophyllu7n erosvm, Annularia sphenophylloideSy and ^phenopteris 
crenata, an almost perfect frond of Neuropteris gigantea 17 inches long. 
An erratic block was observed at Lunn Wood, about two feet cube, one 
face glaciated, the material appeared to be ganister. — H. Wade, secretary. 
The vertebrate section, drawn up by W. Pobinson, presents an elaborate 
report, some of the birds have already appeared in the Naturalist, 
Cuckoos have been plentiful, sixteen were observed. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting June 27th. — Mr. Soppitt 
(vice-president), in the chair. — Mr. B. Spencer read a paper on Plant 
Lore," and took for his starting point the following quotation from Dr. 
Clark, The weeds of one country are the flowers of another." He first 
described what weeds are, and showed how under cultivation they can be 
improved in many ways. As an instance of this he took the corn poppy, 
which when cultivated becomes double. He described how plants will 
deteriorate to their wild state if cultivation is not kept up. One of the 
principal agents of the florist in cultivating plants is hybridizing, and 



REroRTs OF Societies. 



29 



many of our most beautiful cultivated plants have been produced in this 
way, including the roses and geraniums. He concluded by giving a long 
list of our cultivated plants with the wild from which they are derived, 
and the locality where the wild plant grows. Mr. Soppitt showed a 
specimen of Botrychium lunaria from Shipley Glen. Rambles to Esholt 
and Ilkley were decided to be added to the syllabus for the next session. 

Meeting on July 11th. — Mr. Wm. West gave a lecture on "Peat 
mosses," and fully explained their structure, uses, and distribution, as 
well as the characters used in differentiating the species. A large number 
of species and their varieties were shewn in illustration of the lecture, 
together with a number of drawings showing their beautiful microscopical 
structure. The genus Sphagnum is a very characteristic one, the plants 
are always found in watery places, and it is almost entirely to their remains 
that we owe our peat formations. They are of great use also in the 
cultivation of our orchids and the transportation of living plants during 
long voyages. On our extensive moors they are of great use in preven- 
ting both floods and droughts. Mr. Bennett exhibited Cakile maritima 
and Eryngium maritimum from Skegness ; Mr. Soppitt showed Glaucium 
hiteumy Calamintha acinos and the Hollyhock fungus Puccinia malvina- 
cearum from Arnside ; Mr. Stirling showed a number of fresh-water 
shells, among which were three species of Flanorhis including F. corneiis, 
carinatns, and alhus ; Mr. Firth reported having heard the grasshopper 
warbler, at Girlington ; Mr. Rogers showed a photo-micrograph of the 
diatom Arachnoidiscus ovnatus, magnified 400 diameters. 

Meeting July 25th. — Mr. W. D. Roebuck, of Leeds, read a paper on 
The Order Cheiroptera, or Bats." He said that bats are the only mam- 
mals that can really fly, as in the case of the flying squirrel, and others, 
the supposed flight is merely a leap. He described how the developement 
of all the organs of the bats is especially suited to their habits, and said 
that the most striking proof that the}^ were really quadrupeds was their 
way of walking, which he described as shuffling along the ground with 
their thumb and hind-feet, and in some species the tail is also used in 
crawling on the ground or up the rough surfaces of trees. There are 
fifteen British micro-cheiroptera and all are insect feeders. He described 
the pecularities of all the British species, and showed specimens of the 
following : — The lesser horse-shoe bat (RhinolopJius hipposideros) from 
Evestone, near Ripon ; the noctule or great bat (Vesperngo noctula)from 
Masham, the pipistrelle or common bat (V. pipistrellus) from Harrogate, 
the long-eared bat (Plecotns auritm) from Pateley Bridge, the whiskered 
bat (Vespertilio tnystacinns) from various Yorkshire localities. Mr. 
Bennet showed B. calluncB, &c,, from Thorne and Rombald Moor. Mr. 
Terry exhibited C. imhntata, A. fumata, &c., from VVitherslack. Mr. 
Firth, the following insects, taken in this locality, P. comitata, M. galiata 
and N, mundana. Mr. Carter shewed Cramhiis margaritelhis, from Rom- 
balds Moor, and H. nymphcmlis, P. stratiotalis, S. cemhmlis, and E, sam- 



30 



The N^ATUfiALisT. 



bncalis, from Frizinghall, all of which are new to the district record list. 
Mr. Roebuck exhibited, on behalf of Mr. West, a number of shells inclu- 
ding several rare species of Fiipa and Vertigo. 

Meeting August 8th.— Mr. Soppitt described the ramble of the York- 
shire Naturalists' Union to Grassington, which took place on Monday, 
August 7th. He described it as being a most enjoyable and successful 
ramble, and said that all sections were pleased with the number and 
rarity of the specimens they took. In entomology the principal capture 
was made by Mr. Butterfield who took a specimen of M. expolita this 
being the only specimen known to have been taken in Yorkshire. A 
great number of Erehia Blandina were taken in Upper Grass Wood, which 
is the only Yorkshire locality for this species. Mr. Soppitt found a 
parasitic fungus (Xenodochus carbonarins) which was new to the district. 
Mr. Carter described a ramble from Ukley to Grassington, and reported 
taking the following shells : — Helix rupestris, H. liortensis, and JZ. 
lapicida, and a number of beetles, including Cyctorus rostratus and 
Carahus nemorcdis. Mr. Bennett read a paper on Pneumatics," dealing 
principally with the air-pump. In illustration of the paper he showed a 
number of interesting and instructive experiments. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Monthly 
meeting July 31st, Mr. Benjamin Cooke in the chair. Mr. J. R. L. 
Dixon read a paper entitled ' ' A Comparison between the Mechanism of 
Flight in Insects and Birds," in which he detailed the results of the 
interesting researches of Drs. Pettigrew and Marey on the subject of 
flight, and explained by diagrams the mode of action of the wings in 
insects and birds. During the conversazione a specimen of a hymenop- 
terous insect (Rhyssa persvxisoria ?) recently captured in the insect-room 
of the Derby museum, was exhibited through the kindness of the curator, 
Mr. T. J. Moore. Mr. B. Cooke exhibited a specimen of an ant (Myr- 
mica Icemnodis) which combined male, female, and worker, and which had 
been caught by Mr. Chappell in Dunoam Park. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Grassington, Aug. 7th, 1882. — 
The fourth meeting of the season was devoted to the investigation of 
Upper Wharfedale, more especially that portion of it which lies immedi- 
ately round Grassington, Grass Wood, with its rich and varied fauna and 
flora, attracting the greater share of attention. The attendance was 
large, there being about 80 or 90 persons present from all parts of York- 
shire. The day was gloriously fine and sunny — true Y.N.U. weather." 
Most of the visitors approached Grassington by way of Skipton, from 
which they drove the ten miles, while others drove from Ilkley, Cracoe, 
and other places ; and several members investigated the district for a day 
or two previously. The district being one of which the fauna is as yet 
most imperfectly known, the local secretaries had previously prepared (in 
addition to the usual circular) a full summary of what they actually knew 



Reports of !^ocieties. 



31 



on the subject. This paper appeared in the Leeds Mercury supplement of 
July 29th (it was afterwards reprinted in the Young Naturalist), and was 
of considerable utility in eliciting additional information. After the day's 
investigations were concluded, the meetings were held in the Devonshire 
Hall, at Grassington, the chair of the general meeting being occupied by 
Mr. Wm. Cash, F.G.S,, of Halifax. The societies represented were — 
Bradford (2), Dewsbury, Halifax, Heckmondwike, Huddersfield (2), 
Ilkley, Keighley, Leeds (3), Liversedge, Mirfield, Ovenden, Scarborough, 
Wakefield, and York (St. Thomas's). Thanks were voted to Messrs. 
J. N. Dickinson of Leeds, C. H. L. Woodd, F.G.S., J.P., of Outershaw, 
Yen. Archdeacon Boyd, M.A., of ArnclifFe, and the Rev. W. A. ShufFrey 
of Halton Gill, for becoming new subscribers. Thanks were then voted^ 
on the motion of Mr. J. Brodie, to the local secretaries, to the Duke of 
Devonshire for permission to ramble over his estates, to the committee of 
the Grassington Mechanics' Institute for use of their hall, and to Mr. 
W. J. Ray Eddy, E.G. S. , the Duke's agent, for his assistance and kindly 
co-operation. The sectional reports were then taken. Mr. G. T. Porritt, 
F. L.S., of Huddersfield, president of the Entomological Section, spoke 
on the lepidoptera to the following efiect : — Twenty-four species of lepi- 
doptera had been observed, including one quite new to the county ; this 
was Miana expolita (captiuncula), taken by Mr. E. P. P. Butterfield, of 
Wilsden, Bingley. The very local Erebia Blandina was flying in great 
abundance on nearly all the grassy slopes in the High Grass Wood, and 
although hundreds must have been secured during the day, as many more 
might easily have been taken. Nearly all the specimens, too, were in 
splendid condition. The coleoptera were reported on by Mr. E. B. 
Wrigglesworth, of Wakefield, secretary of the section. For the Botanical 
Section, in the absence of all its ofiicers, Mr. John Jackson of Wetherby 
reported that the following species had been noticed, amongst others : — 
Thalictrum flexuosum, Trollius europ?eus, Alsine verna, Sagina nodosa. 
Geranium lucidum, G. sylvaticum, G. sanguineum, Rliamnus catharticus, 
Vicia sylvatica, Prunus padus. Spiraea filipendula, Rubus saxatilis, Hip- 
puris vulgaris, Sedum telephium, Saxifraga hypnoides, S. tridactylites, 
Parnassia palustris, Silaus pratensis, Pimpinella magna, Myrrhis odorata, 
Galium boreale, Asperula odorata, Carduus heterophyllus, Serratula 
tinctoria, Crepis paludosa, Gentiana campestris, Melampyrum sylvaticum. 
Primula farinosa, Epipactis palustris, Asplenium viride, A. trichomanes, 
Oystopteris fragilis. There were also several Charas, which were not 
determined. A few fungi were observed by Mr. H. T. Soppitt, one of 
them — Xenodochus carbonarius — being new to the West-Riding flora. 
The other fungi were — Agaricus rimosus, A. semiglobatus, Boletus 
flavus, B. subtomentosus, Stereum hirsutum, Phrymidium obtusum, P. 
mucronatum, P. acuminatum, ^cidium crassum, M. tussilaginis, 
Puccinia violarum, P. umbelliferum, P. compositarum, Lecythea lini, 
and L. saliceti. The Geological report was given by Mr. Thomas Tate, 
F.G.S., of Leeds, president of the section. Mr. Tate's reports were 



32 



The Naturalist. 



supplemented by Mr. Percy Lund, of Ilkley, who had spent the previous 
two days at Cracoe and Thorpe Hall, where he had found upwards of 50 
fossils, including Lithostrotion basaltiforme, PhilKpsia seminifera, Pro- 
ductus giganteus, P. semireticulatus, P. scabriculus, P. Youngianus, P. 
margaritaceus, P. cora, Spirifer glaber, Streptorhynchus crenistria, 
Terebratula sacculus, T. hastata, Pleurorhynchus abseformis, and Orthis 
resupinata. In Vertebrate Zoology, Mr. Clarke, the secretary of thi 
section, made the report; The list of birds included 32 resident species 
and 18 summer visitants, the most interesting of which were the dipper, 
grey wagtail, common sandpiper, and curlew. A collection of local birds 
in the possession of Mr. F. Holmes, of Grassington, included the following 
additional species : — Stonechat, fieldfare, snow bunting, barn owl, tawny 
owl, snipe, dotterel, common tern, and teal. It also contained a specimen 
of the bittern, shot near Grass Wood about 1876. Another bird of this 
species was shot about the same time near Arncliffe. A pair of short- 
eared owls, shot upon the neighbouring moors, was seen in another 
house. In Mammalia, including information gleaned from the game- 
keeper and others by Mr. Roebuck, there were about 16 species noted. 
These included a bat, the mole, hedgehog, shrew, fox, otter, weasel, 
stoat, squirrel, water vole, field vole, common rat, house mouse, hare and 
rabbit. In addition to these, the red deer may be included in the fauna, 
inasmuch as those in Buckden deer-park have existed there uninter- 
ruptedly from the time at which the deer of Wharf edale were walled in.' 
The reptiles noted were the common lizard, frog, and toad. It was stated 
that there were no vipers in Grass Woods. For the Conchological 
Section, its president (Mr. Cash) occupying the chair of the general 
meeting, called upon Mr. W. Denison Roebuck to report, as follows : — 
During the day 39 species and varieties of mollusca had been collected, 16 
of which were additional to the previously recorded fauna of the district. 
The best captures were the variety gibbosa of Ancylus fluviatilis, taken 
by Mr. Roebuck in the Wharfe at Deepdale Bridge, 15 miles above 
Grassington ; Zonites radiatulus and Clausilia laminata, found in Grass 
High Wood ; the varieties tumidula of ClausiHa rugosa, Nouletiana of 
Cochlicopa tridens, and lubricoides of C. lubrica. The full list of shells 
fs as follows, those marked ^ being new to the district list : — "^Pisidinm 
fontinale, "^Planorbis spirorbis, '^''Limnsea peregra, "'^L. palustris, '^L. 
truncatula, "^Ancylus fluviatilis, ^ditto var. gibbosa, Arion hortensis, 
Limax agrestis, "^L. maximus (one), "^Yitrina pellucida, Succinea putris, 
Zonites cellarius, Z. alliarius, Z. nitidulus, ^Z. radiatulus, Wi. crystallinus, 
¦^'Z. fulvus. Helix nemoralis, H. hortensis, H. arbnstorum, H. rufescens, 
H. concinna, H. hispida, H. fusca (one), H. ericetorum, H. rotundata, H. 
rupestris, H. lapicida (Kettlewell), Bulimus obscurus. Pupa umbilicata, 
Clausilia laminata (one), C. rugosa, ditto var. dubia, '^ditto var. tumidula, 
¦^Cochlicopa tridens, var. Nouletiana, 0. lubrica, Mitto var. lubricoides, 
^Carychium minimum. A vote of thanks to the chairman concluded a 
very pleasant and successful gathering. — W. D. R. 



CONTEIBUTION TO A LIST OF THE HEMIPTERA OF 
LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE 

(THE NORTH OF LANCASTER EXCEPTED), 
(Continued,) 

By Benjamin Cooke. 



BRYOCOKIDiE. 

Bryocoris pteridis, Fall. Hazelgrove; Pettypool, Cheshire. 
Monalocoris filicis, L. Bowdon ; Pettypool. 

PITHANIDJE. 

Pithanus Markeli, H. Schf, Manchester ; Hazelgrove. 

MIKIDJa. 

Miris holsatus, Fab. Rivins^ton ; Hazelgrove ; Marple. 

M. laevigatas, L. Manchester. 

M. calcaratus, Fall. Southport; Bowdon. 

M. erraticus, L. Manchester. 

M. ruficornis, Fall. Southport ; Cheshire coast. 

Lopomorphus ferrugatus, Fall. Hazelgrove. 

L. dolobratus, L. Manchester. 

HAKPOCERID^. 
Harpocera thoracica, Fall. BoUin Valley, near Bowdon. 

LYGID^. 

Lygus rugicollis, Fall. Crosby by F. Archer. Rare. 
L. pabulinus, L. Bowdon; Hazelgrove. 
L. contaminatus, Fall. Common. 
L. campestris, L. Common. 

Liocoris tripustulatus, Fab. Aughton, near Ormskirk ; Bowdon. 
Orthops pastinacese, Fall. Manchester. 

PSALLID^. 

Plagiognathus viridulus, Fall. Bowdon ; Hazelgrove. 
P. arbustorum, Fab. Manchester; Bowdon; Hazelgrove. 
Apocremnus ambiguus, Fall. Hazelgrove. 
A. obscurus, Kirschb. Hazelgrove. 
A. variabilis, Fall. Marple. 
N.S., Vol. viii., Oct., 1882. 



34 



The Natuhalist. 



Psallus querceti, Fall. Soutliport. 

P. salicis, Kerschb. Greenfield. 

P. varians, H. Schf. Manchester ; Marple. 

ONCOTYLID^. 
Macrocoleus Paykulli, Fall. Cheshire coast.. 

CAPSIDJE. 
Ehopalotomus ater, L. Hazelgrove. 
Heterotoma merioptera, Scop. Bowdon. 
Agalliastes piiiicarius, Fall. Southport. 
Orthocephalus saltator, Hahn. Cheshire coast, 

CAMORANOTID^, 
Camaronotus clavatus, L. Sonthport. 

GLOBICEPID^, 
Globiceps selectus, Fieb. Southport. 

DER^OCORID^. 
Derseocoris infnsus, H. Schft, Bowdon ; Pettypool, 
D. bipunctatus, Fab. Common. 
D. sexgiittatus, Fab. Manchester ; Hazelgrove, 
D. fulvomaculatus, De G. Bollin Valley. 

PHYTOCORIDiE. 
Phytocoris tilise, Fab. Manchester ; Bowdon^ 
P. dubius, Doug. Manchester, Pettypool. 
P. dimidiatus, Kirschb. Bowdon. 
P, divergens, Meyer. Hazelgrove. 

LITOSOMID^. 

Litosoma diaphanus, Kirschb. Bowdon. 
L. nassatus, Fab. Bowdon ; Hazelgrove, 

IDOLOCORID^. 
Cyllocoris histrionicus, L. Kivington. 

Idolocoris pallicornis, Fieb. Bowdon ; Hazelgrove ; Marple. 
I. pallidus, Fall. Hazelgrove. 

PHYLIDJG. 

Aetorhinus angulatus, Fall. Manchester ; Hazelgrove. 
Sphyracephalus ambulans, Fall. Bowdon 3 Hyde ; Hazelgrove, 
Phylus melanocephalus, L. Marple. 
p. palliceps, Fieb. Hazelgrove ; Marple, 

103, Windsor-road> 
. Southport. 



THE TRIP OF THE SEASON: OR THE PHANTOM 
CIOABA. 



By a. H. Swinton. 

It is the 18th July, 1882, and I am sitting in a railway carriage 
listening to the reverberation of the steam-puffs adown the vacant 
vistas of a right royal deer park. Suddenly the sepulchral voices of 
two old cronies arise in the next compartment, where I had not 
hitherto perceived that any one was sitting. " Is this Lyndhurst 
Koad, mum ? " " It is, mum." Looks fearful stormy, mum T " It 
looks awful, mum." "Terrible for the schools out here, mum?" 
" It's fearful, mum." 

Things at the worst are sure to mend, thought I. And here I am 
once again stretched on the green-sward beneath my magnificent old 
Hampshire oaks, eating my sandwich in the sweet country air, and 
reclining for a moment to watch the low scud drive along beneath a 
high-stretched curtain of thunder-cloud and blue. But hush 1 what 
can that be just now stirring over-head ? Hark ! hark ! Tree ! 
tree ! And now again the sound comes, tree ! Bless me, can that 
be the voice of Cicada anglica^ alias Melampsalta cicadetta ; said on 
German authority to be not unlike the sound of the Jew's harp, or the 
two full E's of the new harpsichord. Am I awake or asleep ? Tree ! 
tree ! most classical music, tree ! tree ! I will think no more 
about it j these harsh jay-like notes may have been the dying 
minstrelsy of the last of the Cicada^ or the tender modulations of a 
bird voice inspired by so beautiful a sojourn. Where is the genius to 
bring a distracted entomologist the mirror and ring of Canace, so that 
he may learn what secrets yet lie hid high up among the thick leaves 
of the greenwood ? Where are the imprecations to hurl at the head of 
that man of the future, that shall bring here his bricks and mortar to 
desecrate the home of the Cicada ? 

Lest I should go crazy, and rage like another Orestes, I prudently 
dismiss the Cicada from present thoughts, and join myself to a young 
gentleman who is evidently on the track of game. Hallo, Palamides ! 
The bramble flowers are now swept for Fritillaries, and the grassy 
spots beat about for marbled whites. We cannot find a black PapJda, 
that forest gipsy. And the ground, too, proves decidedly damp. I 
am now fairly over my boots, and the children of the morass are 
holding carnival around. 

Now two stately dragon-flies {CorduUgaster annulatui) rush rustling 
past me, and the diamond-headed green water-snake {Tropidonotiis 
natrix) glides between my legs, and threatens to ascend my trousers. 



The Naturalist. 



Now a thrill of pleasure, the large footman moth [CEnistris quadra) is 
clinging on within my net, and now the forest flies or clegs {HemMopa 
plnviaUs) are all at me, driving me to desperation. My new acquain- 
tance is telling me, I believe, that the best way to get to Rufus' Stone 
is to take the 'bus to Lyndhurst ; and now an old tar, with both legs 
shot away, is beginning to narrate the bombardment of Alexandria, 
Bombardment of Alexandria, by Jove ! It is positively four o'clock, 
and I must make a hasty retreat for the station. 

What 1 exclaims my reader, and without even catching a glimpse 
of the Cicada ? Nay, but then I saw it mentally. Can I not recall 
the second of June, 1871, and the happy moment when I watched the 
late Mr. Alfred Owen, seated at a deal table, in the little inn at 
Brockenhurst, engaged in setting a real Cicada anglica^ with its drums 
a-sling, only just the day before beaten from the forest white-thorn» 
And then, besides, I knew something of its family history. 

According to Dr. Hagen (Stet. Zeit. 1855 s. 66-91), the little 
English Cicada^ now but rarely taken in the southern counties, extends 
throughout all Europe, and it is found as far north as the sixtieth 
degree of latitude, being captured in the neighbourhood of St. Peters- 
burg, and occasionally at Kinekulle, in the south of Sweden : it has 
likewise been observed in Siberia, in company with what has been 
taken to be a dark variety {adusta\ and a nearly allied species (C. 
prasiyia.) Dr. Hagan calls it the Cicada montana^ of Scopoli, but it 
has been blessed with many appellatives. In the New Forest it is 
thought to breed among the fern clumps, where the pupa case has been 
noticed, and newly emerged specimens have been captured. In its 
time of appearance, general biology, and characters of colonization, it 
reminds the field naturalist strongly of the Cicada Jioematodes of 
southern Europe, from which species it has been nevertheless widely 
separated by descriptive writers. It is emphatically a bloody Cicada, 
I hope to listen for the sound of its Jew's harp another year. Fale ! 

Guildford, July 29th, 1882. 



DARWIN AND DARWINISM. 
By the Rev. S. Fletcher Wilmams. 

I WISH now to pass to the review of just what it was that Mr. Darwin 
did. What was the contribution that he gave to the scientific thought 
of the world? We talk about Darwinism" and Evolution," but 
I am not far wrong in assuming that^ outside of the students of it, few 



Williams : Darwin and Daewinism. f>7 

persons have looked into it sufficiently to compreliend just what it 
means, and how much it implies, I propose, therefore, to state, as 
plainly as T can, just the particular thing which Mr. Darwin did, just 
what he contributed to the world. 

The question that Darwin tried to answer is the same question that 
has always presented itself to the curiosity of man. For we must 
suppose that, however far back the period may have been when man 
first stood up conscious of himself as a personality — conscious of the 
fact that there was a wondrous world around him of which he was an 
inhabitant, — one of the first questions that would present itself to him 
must have been. Where did I come from ? Who made these lights in 
this sky above me 1 By what process has the world come to be what 
it is 1 It is the same question exactly that every child, treading in the 
steps of a countless line of ancestors, is ready to ask of father and 
mother : Who made the tree, the dog, the cat 1 Who made the sun 
and moon in the heavens^ Who made me ? It is the oldest question 
of the world ; and, until Darwin's time, nothing approaching a clear 
and rational and authoritative answer had been given. 

We look on the face of the world, and we know that very marked 
changes have been going on. We have records of the past by which 
we know that now there are mountain chains where once they did 
not exist. We know that what are now islands — our own England, 
for instance — were once connected with the mainland ; that the shape 
of continents has changed ; that rivers have shifted their beds. We 
know that once, ages ago, other kinds of flowers, other kinds of trees 
and plants, grew where now present species and families and orders 
are holding their places. We know that, if we go far enough back, 
there was a time when man was not here — when the highest kind of 
life that was lived belonged to a lower order or type. It is inevitable, 
then, that until it can be answered, the one great question that men shall 
ask will be — Where did I come from ? How did I come 1 By what 
power, and through what process, has this wonderful world been made 
as it is to-day? 

I said that, before Darwin's, no adequate answer had been given. 
Consider for a moment what I mean. The only theory that had 
ever been heard by the questioning heart of man was that which is 
termed the special creation theory." But, in the true significance of 
words, that is no theory at all. For what do we mean by a theory ? 
A theory is a scheme of thought that attempts to account for certain 
facts. A theory must be built on facts. When we speak of creation, 
where are the facts Did any human being, from the beginning of 



38 



The Naturalist, 



human life, ever see anything created ? Did any human being ever 
know of anything being created ? Can any human being even imagine 
the process of creation ? Can any human being even take the slightest 
step towards explanation of what creation means ? Creation, then, is 
no theory ; it is nothing more nor less than a confession of ignorance. 
When a little boy asks me who made the tree, and I say God made 
it ] how did he make it and I say, by his wonderful power he made 
it grow, — do I answer the child'? Do I explain anything'? It is 
another way (a specious, if a pious way) of letting the child see that I 
do not know anything about it. For the very question that is up for 
discussion is — How? By what process^ Show me some fofce at work 
that is adequate to produce these results. That is the question con- 
cerning the world. 

What does Darwin answer '? Here it is only fair that I should say 
that Darwin is not the first man who has gue%ud in this direction. To 
find the first hints of a theory like this, we must consult Lucretius, 
Democritus, and one and another of the Athenian philosophers ; but 
the wisest of them were only guessing. They showed no force, no 
law, that was capable of explaining the results. If we come down to 
modern times, we must give to such men as Goethe, Lamarck, and 
Saint Hilaire the honour of having been the morning stars of this sun- 
rise represented by Darwin } for they also found some indications that 
looked in this direction. But the time was not yet ripe for them to 
put their fingers to the fruit. They did not find the true cause, the 
real force that could bring about the result. 

We are now ready to understand just what Darwin did. He starts 
with the well-known fact that in every department of life there are 
hundreds and thousands, yea millions, of seeds and of young that 
never grow to maturity. Step into a field, and, if you know what is 
going on there, you will find thousands of little grass-blades starting 
that do not find room to grow, and are crowded out and perish. It is 
said that every cod fish in the ocean lays so many eggs every year, 
that if they were all hatched, and the young should live to grow up, it 
would take only two or three years for the ocean to become solid full. 
How many apple blossoms are seen to fall and come to nothing '? So, 
in every direction, Darwin recognised that which has come to be called 
the " struggle for life " — everywhere on the part of these individuals 
an attempt to grow. But only those comparatively few do grow which 
are adapted to their conditions, which are capable of finding room, air, 
food, light, dew, and rain. Those best fitted to live survive, and they 
are the ones that propagate offspring, and become the progenitors of 
those that follow. 



Williams : Darwin and Darwinism. 



39 



The laws of heredity must be taken into account, and the laws of 
variation, which tend not only to reproduce the life of the parents, but 
along with this, a tendency to vary and be unlike the parent type. 
Now and then, some rare faculty, some new power, or sense, or organ, 
is developed or enlarged this way or that, which proves of advantage 
in the world-wide struggle for life. Do you not see, then, how 
naturally this type of life gains predominance'? It is that which 
survives, and which in its turn produces offspring, and controls the 
future. 

Darwin discovered and verified this law of natural selection, or what 
Herbert Spencer has called ^* the survival of the fittest showing that 
here was a power capable (only give it time enough) of producing the 
wonderful results that we see in the various forms of vegetable, animal, 
and human life around us. 

Only give it time enough, I say. Here was the difficulty. This was 
the very thing that so long stood in the way of the world's progress in 
this direction. The world had been shut up in the narrow confines of 
six thousand years, and there was no room for any such process as 
this. So long as it was a part not only of man's religion, but of 
science, to believe the world had existed but six thousand years, any 
such theory was simply nonsense, because the causes which he demon- 
strated to be at work were utterly inadequate to produce such immense 
results in so brief a period of time. 

But the study of the modern world was preparing the way for 
Darwin. He came in the very fulness of time, when the world was 
ripe for his thought. Geology had been at work, digging away at the 
crust of the earth, and asking the old questions 3 and just as by cutting 
through a tree trunk and counting the circles you can tell its years, so 
it was discovered that by digging away at the crust of the earth we 
could read the records of the world, whose age was written by the 
centuries themselves as they passed over it and left behind their foot- 
marks. 

Prof. John Fiske, in a recent article in the Atlantic Monthly^ has 
proved almost beyond question that man was living in Europe at least 
two hundred and fifty thousand years ago ; and man is simply a 
blossom on the summit of the trunk of the century plant. Man is a 
parvenu of yesterday. Time, even so far as this world is concerned, 
reaches back millions and millions of years. And life has been on 
this old planet cycles and cycles of ages, creeping from the lowest 
forms with feeble foot, until at last its crown and culmination — man- 
has appeared. The thing, then, that Darwin did was to discover ancJ 



40 



The Na^turalist. 



verify the existence of this force of natural selection, by which the 
process could be rationally explained. 

We may conceive of life under the image of a great tree : from man 
clear down to the little globule of protoplasm, one common life, repre- 
sented and summed up in root and trunk. Toward the bottom runs 
off a great trunk of the tree, and this represents the kingdom of fishes ; 
limbs, branches, twigs, leaves, representing genera, species, individuals. 
A little way above this, another limb branches out, and here is the 
reptilian life. A little above this is the bird-life of the world ; and 
above this again, the mammal life, of which the highest is the anthro- 
poid, or manlike ape. Above this, the highest branch or outflowering 
of it all, is man, having, as nearest of kin, the anthropoid ape, but not 
his direct descendant in the sense that a child is produced from his 
father. 

This, in a word, is Darwinism. I do not intend to discuss it. I 
have argued it at length in a paper which I had the honour and the 
pleasure of reading before the Literary and Philosophical Society in 
January last, and which has subsequently been published by the 
Council of the Society ; and I do not wish to re-traverse the ground. 
I confine myself on this occasion to narrative and exposition. 

The scientific world was profoundly impressed both by Darwin's 
doctrine, and his method of supporting it. The theory was trenchantly 
criticised by many naturalists, who, astounded by its boldness or 
novelty, were not prepared ex animo, or without further consideration, . 
to accept it ; and for this they are entitled rather to commendation 
than blame. The most notable of the scientific assailants was Agassiz, 
who made much of the candid admission of difficulties by Darwin 
himself, and who attacked the theory as resting on unwarrantable 
assumptions. But incredulity was soon followed by hesitation, and, 
in no very long time, by endorsement and acceptance by many eminent 
proselytes. A good many years have now elapsed since nearly every- 
body having any sort of claim to speak in the name of science, went 
over to " Darwinism," with or without reservations j and, in the field 
of science, the victory of " natural selection " and ^* evolution " may 
be regarded as complete. Mr. Darwin himself might with propriety 
be described as to the last a Darwinian under reserve, for his mind 
was singularly open ; and, strange as it may seem, after all the noise 
to which his published writings have given rise, no man (as I have 
said) was ever less of a dogmatist or a bigot. He was pre-eminently 
an enquirer. As a tireless interrogator of nature by observation and 
inductive reasoning, he may be said to have fulfilled to its utmost 



Williams : Darwin and Darwinism. 



41 



extent the ideal set up by Bacon. In process of time it came to be 
admitted, either tacitly or in express terms, that his hypothesis, after 
all, did not necessarily carry with it all the consequences it was at first 
supposed to involve ; and a common attitude towards it among those 
who were long its active opponents may be described as that of 
tolerant recognition or watchful neutrality. It is an established fact 
that, during the two-and-twenty years it has been before the world, 
the doctrine of the origin of species by means of natural selection has 
made a progress which, considering its novelty and its startling 
implication, is absolutely without a parallel. For it need hardly be 
said that the origin of species in this way raises a presumption in 
favour of the more comprehensive doctrine of evolution, with which 
also the name of Darwin, is inseparably bound up. Thus, while for 
fame and distinction he cared literally nothing ; while the one object 
he sought throughout life to attain was the truth ; while for this he 
laboured with a single-mindedness, a freedom from the bondage of pet 
theories and preconceived ideas, that are almost unexampled^ — he had, 
during his lifetime, what to him was undoubtedly the highest reward 
that could be bestowed upon him, in the ever-increasing acceptance of 
the theory he was the first to formulate by those best competent to 
form a judgment. That it is a final or complete revelation, he himself 
would have been the last to assert ; but he lived to see it accepted as 
an immense step in advance on a path in which for many centuries no 
progress had been achieved. 

Antagonism to it came from another quarter ; and here also judg- 
ment has to be tempered with respect for the best or deepest opinions 
or convictions of the human heart. This class of critics, without 
pretending to much scientific knowledge, considered the Darwinian 
theory to be in direct opposition to the teaching of the Bible ; so it 
was fiercely assailed by the clergy of all churches, and for a long time 
Darwinism was regarded as synonymous with infidelity. The idea 
that vegetable, animal, and human life had been evolved from a few 
primordial forms, or perhaps from one, by a process of law, instead of 
each having been called into being by separate and successive acts of 
creation, was regarded as antagonistic to the principles of revealed 
religion, and the religious commotion was as loud and angry as was 
the scientific wrangle, and continued much longer. But, now, the 
theologians have practically come round to admitting that Darwinism 
is a tenable theory — a theory quite consistent with the divine origin 
and government of the world. So complete is the change which has 
taken place in the attitude of the Church towards it, that a religious 



42 



The Naturalist. 



paper can now say, The attitude of the great mass of religions 
dogmatism to this new philosophy was no less than scandalous." And 
yet there never has been a scientific man whose character and temper 
and manner were so little calculated to exasperate opponents, or create 
doubts about his single-mindedness, as Darwin's. Unfortunately he 
was not the first investigator whose conclusions are now universally 
accepted, who at the outset incurred the angry and vehement oppo- 
sition of religious people, but surely he ought to be the last. Is it too 
much to hope that he will be the last ? It seems barely possible that 
so striking an example of the tremendous mistakes into which pious 
men may fall regarding dangers to their faith, can fail to impress them 
with the necessity of greater caution and courage in their attitude 
towards the explorations of the physical universe which are now going 
on in every direction. 

It ought also to put an end to the curious attempts of which we, 
every now and then, hear from religious bodies to make some kind of 
treaty between religion and science, in which each shall lay down 
certain limits beyond which it will agree not to go. All such schemes 
are based on the assumption which was applied to Darwinism — that 
there is some authority competent to answer for science, and decree 
where it shall stop and what it shall examine. There is no such 
authority ; there never was, and never can be. Eeligious men can 
draw up creeds and confessions of faith on which they can agree to 
stand, and can trace the boundaries of their own beliefs, but a scientific 
man can do nothing of the kind. In fact, he is bound not to do it. 
Continued inquiry is to him a condition of progress. It is his duty to 
treat nothing in the physical field as beyond question. Science, too, 
does not mean what he believes, but what is, — and therefore he can 
never tell to-day what he may be compelled by new facts to believe 
to-morrow. 

Another lesson which I trust theologians have learned from Darwin's 
career is, the folly and injustice of holding scientific discoverers 
responsible for what seem the probable moral or social consequences of 
their discoveries. Half the odium heaped upon Darwin was due to 
this. It was thought apparently by many alarmed souls that he ought 
to have kept the result of his enquiries to himself, lest it should 
unsettle some people's religious faith, or loosen in others the bonds of 
social obligation. It now appears by the confession of his revilers 
that, had he done so, he would have committed a great mistake, even 
from their point of view. They now acknowledge that what they 
thought were necessary or very probable consequences of his revela- 



Eainfall for August. 



48 



tions were not necessary or probable consequences at all ; but, on the 
contrary, these revelations were a flood of light on the world's great 
altar stairs " ; that nobler theistic conceptions are furnished by the 
doctrine of creation by evolution than by the doctrine of creation by 
special Thus, whatever judgment posterity may pronounce upon 

his genius and his work, it is already incontestable that in the field of 
science few, if any, men of our time have done so much to extend the 
bounds of actual knowledge ; while in the fields alike of science and 
theology, no man has ever exercised so great an influence over contem- 
porary thought, as Charles Darwin. 



liainfell fox %xxQ\xd. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




Davs 






Fall. 




sea 
level. 






1882. 


1881. 




HuDDERSFiELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Eobson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

1-68 


20 


23-04 


^- 20-19 


18 


0-20 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


2-60 


16 


34-80 


29-66 






Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


1-630 


21 


18-305 


tl5-468 


18 


0-360 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


2-150 


19 


22-550 


J20-366 


26 


0-320 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


1-93 


16 


19-30 


15-81 


30 


0-28 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


2-56 


17 


27-79 


24-23 


22 


0-43 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


1-97 


17 


20-50 


18-36 


30 


0-29 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


2-54 


18 


21-02 


16-50 


22 


0-43 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


3-18 


18 


18-29 




25 


0-73 



* This is the average to date for 16 years, 1866-81. 
t Average of 28 years, 1853-62 and 1865-82. 
t Average of 13 years, 1870-82. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society.— Meeting Sept. 12th, Mr. T. Lister 
in the chair. — The botanical section reported that all the flowering plants 
known in the district, except about 25, had been observed and dated. 
Amongst these were (Aug, 10th), Gentiana Amavella, Inula dysenterica, 
Impatiens noli-me-tangere, Melilotus album, Sedum telephium ; 22nd, Dro- 
sera rotundifolia, Bydrocotile vulgare. The vertebrate section reported 
many birds, amongst which were— Aug. 7, spotted flycatcher, coot, moor- 
hen, magpie ; 20th, wheatear, whitethroat, redstart, swift ; Sept. 5, wild 
ducks, geese, three terns, snipe, green woodpecker, many sparrow-hawks, 
kestrels, magpie, ring ouzqls— all by Mr. E. Creighton, of Hemsworth. 



44 



The Naturalist. 



A letter from him on Sept. 11th records five herons, some of them young. 
He thinks they have bred in the woods by Hemsworth dam ; if so, we 
may have another heronry. No doubt it will be protected by W. H. 
Leatham, Esq., M.P., as that at Walton was by Mr. Waterton. Sept. 8, 
sparrow-hawk and six terns ; 10th, gold-crested wren, great, blue, and 
marsh tits, five herons, coots, moorhens, lapwings, three of swallow tribe. 
Last sand-martin noted on 11th, and two ring ouzels shot at Penistone. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Monthly 
meeting, Aug. 28th, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) in the chair. — Mr. 
T. von Sobbe read a paper entitled ^' Our Holidays at Tunbridge Wells," 
in which he detailed (and exhibited) the entomological captures made by 
himself and son in that neighbourhood during the early summer, con- 
cluding with some remarks on the general scarcity of insects during the 
whole of the preseut season. Mr. C. J. S. Makin read a paper on Silk 
and Silkworms," in which, after briefly sketching the history of sericulture 
from its origin in China to its introduction into England in 1685, he gave 
a detailed account of the life-history of several of the silk-moths which 
have, within the last few years, attracted the attention of silkworm 
breeders, such as Bomhyx Yama-mai, B. cynthia, B. pernyi, B. cecropio. 
(the silk-moth of the United States), A. atlas, &c. He illustrated his 
paper by specimens of each species, and by living larvae (worms) of 
B. mori, B. cecropia, and B. Roylei. 

Manchester Oryptogamio Society. — Monthly meeting, August, Dr. 
B. Carrington, F.R.S.E., in the chair. — Captain Cunlifie exhibited a 
beautiful series of mosses, mounted for microscopical examination. Some 
of the sections of the stems and leaves of Sphagna were excellent as 
scientific objects, and admirable as specimens of manipulative skill. Mr. 
William Jones, of Llandudno, sent a few freshly gathered mosses, from 
the Orme's Head, for distribution amongst the members. Mr. C. P. 
Hobkirk, F.L.S., editor of the Naturalist, sent copies of his paper on the 
development of Osmunda regalis. Mr. W. H. Pearson exhibited speci- 
mens of Lejetmia calyptrifolia, collected by Mr. C. Wild at Tyn-y-Groes ; 
he also exhibited specimens of a sphagnum new to Euro^DC, Sphagnum 
sedoides, Bridel, which had been found at Finisterre. A collection of 
lichens, which had been collected by W. H. Scholes in South America, 
and specimens of the male plant of Radula germaiia (Jack), collected by 
F. Rogers on Ben Cruachan, July, 1881, and Radula coimnutata 
(Gottsche), from the herbarium of Dr. Carrington, collected in the New 
Forest by C. Lyell, 1818, were exhibited by Mr. Pearson. Mr. Cunhfte 
exhibited a quantity of starch which he had obtained from the rhizome of 
Pteris aquilma, and stated that the starch grains of this fern differed con- 
siderably from the starch grains of L. fllix-mas ; the hon. secretary, a 
number of mosses recently collected in New Zealand. Dr. Carrington 
then read a short paper on the Manchester water supply at Eccles, where 
it had been the subject of some complaint in reference to its drinkable 
qualities.— T. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 



Reports of Societies. 



45 



OvENPEN Naturalists' Society. — Mr. J. Spencer gave a brief descrip- 
tion of some new discoveries which he had lately made in fossil botany. 
These included a new species of fossil aquatic plant, which differed from 
Astromyelon Williamsoni in the radiating plates of the bark being com- 
posed of three rows of cells, whereas those of the latter plant are only 
composed^ of one row of cells. He had also found another of these water- 
plants which differed from the others in having a vascular axis, whereas 
the other species have cellular axes. He had also made some more 
important discoveries in fossil fungi, forming interesting additions to our 
knowledge of these fossil parasites. But perhaps the most interesting 
addition to our knowledge of these coal-plants has been his discovery of 
a new species of fossil plant, forming a link " between two well-known 
species. No two species of plants can be more distinct in their internal 
organization than the fossils known under the names of Sigillaria vascu- 
lare and Lepidodendron Harcourtii. The newly-discovered plant occupies 
an intermediate position between them. /S. vasculare has a woody cylinder 
surrounding a vascular axis or pith, while L. Harcourtii has no woody 
cylinder, but it possesses certain peculiar vascular bundles, which 
proceeded from the pith to the leaves, which were small and numerous. 
The new plant combines within itself both these characteristic features of 
those well-known plants. This is one of those innumerable facts which 
support the great doctrine of evolution," and which are continually 
forcing themselves upon the attention of scientific observers. 

Wakefield Naturalists' and Philosophical Society. — Annual 
meeting, Sept. 6th, Mr. J. Wainwriglit, F.L.S., president, in the chair. 
Mr. E. B. Wrigglesworth, secretary, read the twelfth annual report, 
which stated that there had been no increase in the number of members, 
though the society had made steady progress during the past session. 
There had been twelve meetings. The lecture programme had been very 
successful, and the council thanked those who had taken part. The society 
had had three rambles during the year, which were well attended. They 
had kept in view the collection of information on the flora and fauna of the 
district, with the object of its ultimate publication ; and a great amount 
of original matter was in the possession of the various sections, ready for 
the press. During the year the society had to deplore the loss of two 
of its oldest members— Mr. William Talbot and Mr. John Wilson. The 
Scientific and Fine Art Exhibition was opened Nov. 10th, 1881. Mr. 
J. Wainwright was re-elected president, and Mr. E. B. Wrigglesworth 
hon. secretary. A sub-committee was appointed to consider the question 
of procuring the old Town Hall for the purposes of the society. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Wakefield, Sept. 9th. — The fifth 
meeting of the year was planned for the investigation of Haw Park and 
surrounding district, with Wakefield as the final rendezvous, but as on 
account of the game preserves the local secretaries were not able to . 
obtain permission to work Haw Park Woods themselves, the area of 



46 



The Naturalist. 



investigation was made to include a rather wider extent of ground, all, 
however, lying between Wakefield and Barnsley. Five routes were 
arranged, and for the most part carried out according to programme, 
although the attendance was not at all what it ought to have been in a 
rich district so convenient of access for the masses of the members of the 
West Riding societies. Mr. C. W. Richardson, one of the local secre- 
taries, conducted a party which left Haigh station for WooUey Edge, 
Seccar Lane, and Woolley Hall, park, and gardens, returning from 
Crigglestone station. The other local secretary, Mr. E. B. Wriggles- 
worth, led a party which, starting from Darton station, visited Pye, 
Husband, Wind Hill, Cow-car and Haigh Hill Woods, and also returned 
from Crigglestone station. A party, led by Mr. J. Wilcock, and mostly 
conchologists, left Kirkgate station, Wakefield, proceeding by way of 
Belle Yue to Agbrigg, thence along the banks of the Wakefield and 
Barnsley Canal to Haw Park, and afterwards through Chevet Woods, 
returning to Wakefield by way of Sandal, Castle Hill, and Moat. Mr. 
J. L. Chaplin's party left Westgate station for Walton, from which they 
visited Berg and Greenside quarries, and afterwards keeping the high 
road through Winterset and Ryhill Pits, returned from Pyhill station. 
Mr. J. Wainwright, F.L.S., president of the Wakefield Society, and a 
small party, drove in the afternoon to Woolley Hall and Park. There 
were also a few members exploring the district on their own account, 
unconnected with any party. At 5-25 p.m. an excellent tea was provided 
in the Board School, Westgate, the sectional and general meetings being 
also held there. The chair of the general meeting was occupied by the 
Rev. Wm. Fowler, M. A., vice-president. It was found that the Barnsley, 
Bradford (2), Dewsbury, Doncaster, Heckmondwike, Huddersfield (Liter- 
ary and Scientific Society), Ilkley, Leeds (3), Liversedge, Malton, Ripon, 
and Wakefield societies were represented. The individual attendance 
was very meagre, only about 40 or 50 members being present. The 
minutes of the Grassington meeting were read and confirmed. Thanks 
were voted to Sir Lionel Pilkington and Mr. G. B. Wentworth for 
permission to visit their estates, to the Wakefield School Board for the 
use of the Schools, and to the local secretaries, on the proposition of Mr. 
Thomas Lister. The list of new subscribers included Dr. Crowther and 
Mr. T. Stevens, both of Wakefield. Mr. Lister then handed in a notice 
of motion on behalf of Mr. W. E. Brady, the secretary of the Barnsley 
Naturalists' Society, to the efiect that at an early meeting of the Union 
he should move, either personally or by deputy, the following resolution : 
That having taken into consideration the large number of our members 
who, from commercial and other engagements, are unable to attend the 
Saturday meetings, and having further considered the objectionable 
efiects which the prohibitory system now followed admittedly exercises 
upon the members thus debarred from attending an equitable share of 
the Union's meetings ; this meeting recommends that in future one-half 
of the excursions and meetings of this Union should be held on Satur- 



Reports of Societies. 



47 



days, and the other half on some other days, and that the annual meeting 
should be held alternately upon Saturdays and Mondays, or some other 
day which may afterwards be shown to be of greater advantage." It was 
pointed out that the present practice of the Union was (at all events up 
to last year inclusive) to hold half the excursions on Monday and half on 
Saturday, and the chairman announced that the motion would come on 
for discussion at the annual meeting at Selby, next March. The reports 
of sections were then taken. Mr. Fowler reported on the plants, that, 
owing to the lateness of the season, and the fact that the coal measures 
(proverbially unproductive in plants) were the only strata visited, there 
was but a poor display of specimens. The most noticeable were Chelidonium 
majus, Bidens tripartita, Littorella lacustris, and Sagittaria sagittifolia. 
Mr. H. T. Soppitt then mentioned that Haigh proved to be a very 
productive place for fungi, of which he had collected the following : — 
Agaricus (Amanita) vaginatus Bull, A. (A.) rubescens P., A. (Lepiota) 
granulosus Batsch., A. (Clitocybe) laccatus Scop., A. (Collybia) macu- 
latus A. & S., A. (C.) tuberosus Bull, A. (Mycena) galericulatus Scop., 
A. (Stropharia) semiglobatus Batsch., A. (S.) seruginosus Curt., A. 
(Coprinus) radiatus Fr., A. (Panseolus) separatus L., A. (Galera) hyp- 
norum Batsch., Marasmius peronatus Fr., E-ussula emetica Fr., R. 
ochroleuca Fa., Lactarius rufus Fr., L. glyciosmus Fr., Paxillus involutus 
Fr., Hygrophorus psittacinus Fr., Boletus calopus Fr., Polyporus versi- 
color Fr. , Dacrymyces stillatus Nees, Scleroderma vulgare Fr. , Lycoper- 
don gemmatum Fr., Spumaria alba DC, Sphserobolus stellatus Tode, 
Ceuthospora phacidioides Grev., Puccinia hieracii, P. lapsani, ^cidium 
tussilaginis Pers., Coleosporium tussilaginis Lev., Trichobasis suaveolens 
Lev., T. rubigo-vera Lev., Melampsora betulina Desm., Pilobolus crystal- 
linus Tode, Peziza calycina Sch., P. granulata Bull, Bulgaria inquinans 
Fr., Ascobolus ciliatus Sch., Helotium aciculare, Fr., Spha3rotheca 
pannosa Lev. , Erysiphe martii Link, Chsetomium elatum K-ze, Corticium 
sambuci P. For the Geological Section, Mr. Thomas Tate, F.G.S, 
president of the section, reported as follows : — The district is situated 
exclusively upon the middle coal measures, ranging from the Barnsley 
coal seam, exposed south of Crigglestone station, up to the Havercroft 
rock, capping Pyhill. The chief seams are the Beamshaw, or Stanley 
Main, the Winter, or scale coal, and the Crofton seams, the latter seen 
east of Walton station on the Great Northern railway. The Woolley 
Edge rock makes a fine escarpment of coarse grit with quartz pebbles. As 
it approaches Wakefield, which stands upon it, this rock assumes a fine- 
grained flaggy structure. The Oaks rock also forms a prominent feature 
in the landscape, as at Heath Common. It is also exposed in the 
Agbrigg and Greenside quarries, and in numerous cuttings on the Midland 
railway. These fresh- water sandstones contain much drifted vegetation, 
usually fragmentary, so that good fossils could not be obtained^ 
Specimens of estuarine, or fresh-water shells (Myalina modiolaris, 
Anthracosia acuta, Anthracomya), from the coal shales, were exhibited. 



48 



The Naturalist. 



In the absence of the officers of the Vertebrate Section, Mr. Thomas 
Lister of Barnsley reported all three of the linnets, grey, green, lesser 
redpoll, two crested grebes, kestrel, three of the tits, ringdove, lapwings 
numerous, coots, moorhens, bullfinch, magpie. Migrants — redstart, 
whitethroat, blackcap, three of the swallow tribe, whinchat, wheatear, 
willow warbler last heard in song : total, 9 migrants, and 25 resident and 
water-birds. In the absence of the officers of the Conchological Section, 
Mr. H. Pollard, the secretary of the Leeds Naturalists' Club, reported 
that Mr. Wilcock's party had found 41 out of the 91 species and varieties 
which had been known to occur along their line of route, that though 
none of them were rare, some of them were very local in their range. 
The best captures included Helix aculeata, Zonites excavatus, Z. fulvus, 
Z. nitidus, Vertigo pygmsea, Limnaea palustris, var. tincta, Neritina 
fluviatilis. By thin ia Leachii, Planorbis nautileus, Pisidium fontinale, var. 
Henslowana, Physa fontinalis, and Succinea elegans. A search amongst 
a quantity of mud recently taken from the bottom of the Canal, yielded 
very good examples of Anodonta cygnea and Unio pictorum. For the 
Entomological Section its officers reported. The secretary, Mr. E. B. 
Wrigglesworth, reported on the coleoptera that the following beetles 
were taken : — Notiophilus biguttatus. Fab., N. rufipes, Curt., Carabus 
catenulatus. Scop., C. clathratus. Linn., Leistus ferrug ineus. Linn. , 
Calathus cisteloides, Prz., C. melanocephalus. Linn., Harpalus ruficornis, 
Fabr., Callidium alni. Linn., Anchomenus prasinus, Munb, Olisthopus 
rotundatus, Pk., Silpha rugosa. Linn., Necrophorus ruspator, Er., 
Colymbetes fuscus, Linn., Aphodius luridus, Payk., A. punctatosulcatus, 
St., Cryptorhynchus lapathi, Linn., Chrysomela polita. Linn., Otiorhyn- 
chus picipes, Fabr., Tachinus subterraneus. Linn., Staphylinus pubes- 
cens, DeG., Ilybius ater, Er., &c., &c. The president, Mr. G. T. 
Porritt. F.L.S., reported on the lepidoptera, that Nonagria fulva had 
been found not uncommonly in a rough field at Haigh, and the I'drvse of 
Coleophora csespititiella were in thousands on the seeds of the rushes 
growing in the same field. Other species taken included Tryphaena 
fimbria, Hydrsecia nictitans, and a number of tortrices. Hymenoptera 
were plentiful at Haigh and Woolley Edge. In connection with 
the business of the Vertebrate Section, the secretary remarked that 
he thought the Union could hardly visit Wakefield without in some 
way referring to the great loss it had sustained in the decease of Mr. 
William Talbot, author of ''The Birds of Wakefield." The subject 
was continued by Mr. Lister, who spoke from a long friendship and 
intimate knowledge of Mr. Talbot ; by Mr. J. M. Barber, who referred 
to the fact that Mr. Talbot was the first to suggest the establishment of / 
the W.R.C.N.S. (now the Y.N.U.) ; and by the chairman, who paid a 
high compliment to Mr. Talbot's worth, and stated that he knew much 
more than ever he professed to know. A reference to the forthcoming 
meeting at Pilmoor, and a vote of thanks to the chair, concluded the 
proceedings. — W. D. R. 



(ftigmal Jlrtrclcs. 



SPHAGNUM TORREYANUM, SULLIVANT, IN BRITAIN, 
By H. Boswell. 



This moss, which appears in Braithwaite's Sphagnaceee as Sph, cnspi-- 
dwtum,, variety Torreyi^ has heretofore escaped notice in Europe, but 
during a ramble this summer I fell in with it in the neighbourhood of 
Whitchurch, Shropshire, and it may be looked for in wet bogs in 
other parts of the country, when better known. Its aspect is that of 
very tall and robust cmpidatum^ and it is doubtless rightly placed as a 
variety of that species. 

My specimens agree exactly with American ones, and also with the 
figure and description of Mendocinum, in Sullivant's Icones, which 
Braithwaite unites to Torreyanmn ; but Ran and Harvey in theit 
catalogue of the mosses of North America, treat the latter as distinct. 
It appears to have been found only in California, and I have not seen 
it, but probably specimens would show its identity with Torreyanum. 

The most striking features are, the large size, very long stout stems, 
large triangular stem-leaves, and long semi-tubular branch-leaves. 

Oxford, Oct. 12th, 1882, 

NEW AND CRITICAL EUROPEAN MOSSES. 
By G. LiMPRicirr. 

(Translated.) 

In the German magazine, Flora," No. 13, 1882, are a few notes on 
some new and critical mosses, by Gustav Limpricht ; as they are 
species nearly related to our British ones, a translation of Herr 
Limpricht's notes may be of interest, in calling the attention of our 
British muscologists to these species, which should be looked for here. 

Hypmm {Limnobium) styriacum, n, sp. — Synoicous ; in extensive, 
depressed, soft cushions of a sordid-, yellowish-, or golden-brown- 
green colour, stem filiform, very slender, up to 8 cm. long, procum- 
bent, rootless, almost simple or repeatedly furcate, at the base destitute 
of leaves ; branches irregular, slender and flaccid, rootless; leaves 
loosely disposed, standing-off erect on all sides, almost spoonlike- 
concave, slightly longitudinally-plicate, from sub-cordate to ovate, with 
a slightly decurrent base, gradually narrowed to a somewhat reflexed 
lanceolate point, margin entire ; nerve firm, furcate, the longest arm 
N,S., Vol, viii., Nov., 1882. 



50 



The Naturalist. 



extending above the middle of the leaf; the leaf-cells above more 
rhomboid, in the middle of the leaf somewhat winding almost fusi- 
form, yet proportionately always short and wide, at the base of the leaf 
rhomboid-hexagonal, in the angles of the leaf rectangular yet not 
concave > the large flower-buds rooting at their base contain both 
sexua] organs, yet each are separate, and are surrounded by their own 
involucral leaves, whereby the young flower-buds often appear to be 
only male ; if, however, they are unfolded they show in the inside the 
rudimentary archegonia surrounded by the yet less developed peri- 
ehsetial leaves. All the involucral leaves are nerveless, and of a looser 
cellular texture, the inner pericheetial leaves erect, lengthened out 
lanceolately ; drawn out abruptly into a moderately long point ; 
pedicel about 1 cm. long } capsule cernuous; operculum high conical^ 
red. 

A longitudinal section of the capsule shows between the operculum 
and the theca two large cells, which probably form the annulus, but 
whose character, as also that of the peristome and spores, can only be 
determined from the perfectly ripe capsule. The spores probably 
ripen in autumn. 

Discovered by J. Breidler in four different stations, all in the 
neighbourhood of Schladming, in Styria, about 2000 metres high. 

This species has already a previous history ; my friend J. Breidler 
sent me the flrst specimens of it as Limnobium palustre, male, dioicous 
and communicated to me that Juratzka held it to be Hypmim palustre, 
Bchimper, on the contrary, had declared it to be an unknown Limnohium 
which he doubted belonged to Hypimm palustre. This new species i& 
distinguished from all allied ones by its synoicous inflorescence. It pos- 
sesses a certain similarity in habit to Hypnum palustre^ it however 
shows, in a cross section of the leaf, shorter and wider cells, leaf- 
angles never concave, and a constantly stronger furcate nerve. 

From weaker forms of Hypmim cocJileari/oUum it is easy to distin- 
guish it by the form and pointing of the leaves. 

Limnobium cocJdearifoUiim-, Yenturi in Erb. crittog. Ital. series 11 ^ 
Fasc. X. (1871); " Hedwigia," 1872, p. 71. 

Of this species (as of many others) Schimper has, in the 2nd ed. of 
the " Synopsis," (1876) taken no notice, and consequently 
describes I.e. p. 778, a perfectly sterile plant from the Pyrenees, as 
Hypnum Goulardi, Schimp., n. sp., which belongs here. • Yenturi has 
himself, even in Bryineae ex regione italica Tirolis, Tridentina 
dicta," " Revue Bryol.," 1879, p. 62, placed before it Schimper's 
name (here written in error H. Gounodii and coclileariforme\ but the 



LiMPHicHT : New anb Critical "European Mosses. 51 



name Hypnuni cocMearifolium possesses the priority ; moreover, 
Venturi (I.e.) had already described the fertile plant. 

Since Geheeb, in Flora," 1881, p. 296, has announced the 
discovery of Hypnum Goulardi^ Schimp. for Germany, I hold it time 
to speak as I do lest the false name should become naturalised. 

Geheeb remarks (I.e.) that he had observed on Breidler's specimens 
from Keeskar,. female flowers, whereby the plant would be dioicous t 
but it is monoicous, as Venturi had already stated in the diagnosis. 
The specimen in the Erb. crittog. Ital. Venturi collected in the High 
Alps of Rabbi in the Tyrol. In my herbarium are also specimens 
from the Neunerspitz, near Innsbruck, legit Venturi, from the 
Myringer Alps, on the Ross Rogel, near Innsbruck, leg. F. Arnold 
(ex herb. Juratzka), from Keeskar, in the Obersulzbachthal ; 
Pinzgau leg. J. Breidler, and from the Gnadenthal, near Dollach^ 
in Carinthia, leg. J. Breidler. 

Brachythecium Venturii. Warnst " Flora," 1881, n. 34. In J. Milde's 
" Bryologia Silesiaca 1869, is a remark on Brachythecium populeum 
Br. and Sch., but which, through the mistake of the printer, has not 
been inserted in the right place, p. 335, but only upon p. 336 after 
Brachythecium plumosum. Had the author of Brachythecium Venturii 
taken notice of this remark, and compared the diagnosis of 
Brachythecium amoenum, Milde, " Hedwigia." 1869, n. 61, it would 
probably not have escaped him that the characters of his new form 
agree with those of Milde's species. 

To be sure Br. Venturii should have, according to the description , 
strongly-nerved inner perigonial leaves, but in the specimen of the 
original from the hands of the author I find the inner perigonial 
leaves perfectly nerveless. 

Milde called his plant, whilst he fell in with the view of Juratzka^ 
I.e. Bryol. Sil." a critical form of Brachythecium populmm^ Br. and 
Sch. ; a similar form (for never do even two individuals of the same 
variety agree) is Brachythecium Venturii, and if I also regard both 
plants as belonging to the circle of form of Brachythecium popiileum, 
yet this form is far from being a collective species in the meaning of 
Warnstorf s " Monograph of the Sphagna.'' 

Bicranum comptum, Schimp. Syn. ed. II. p. 97. — Dr. A. Sauter, 
the discoverer of this species, forwarded me specimens of the original 
for examination ; they, however, only consisted of a few stems* 
According to my view, this species shows no relation to Bicranum 
longifolium^ with which the author of the species compares it, but to 
a form of Dlcranodontium clrcinnatum^ Wils. — ^a view which may be 



52 



The Naturalise. 



arrived at from the comparison of tlie diagnosis of botli species^ 
Specimens agreeing in every particular have been also collected by 
J. Breidler from the classic station. 



SEMERDALE : 

NOTES ON ITS PHYSICAL FEATURES AND MOLLUSCAN FAUNA. 
By Wm. Denison Roebuck. 



Sem:ert)ALE, in the vicinity of which I spent my vacation this year, 
is-^as Mr. Baker says — miique among the NTorth Yorkshire Dales in 
its shape and character. One of the contributory valleys of Wensley- 
dale, it differs entirely in its physical aspect from such as Coverdale^ 
Bishopdale, Cotterdale, (^c, all of which merge gradually into the 
main valley. Semerdale^ on the contrary, is almost completely 
isolated : the hills which enclose it stand boldly out towards the Yore 
and approach each other so closely, near Bainbridge, as to leave but a 
very narrow outlet for the Bain river, which carries into the Yore the 
the whole drainage of the dale. One consequence of the virtual shut- 
ting off of this little basin of not more than 20 square miles of country 
is that it contains one of the largest of the very few Yorkshire lakes, 
which, with the usual re-duplication of syllables all meaning the same 
thing, is called Lake Semerwater (Lake-Sea-Mere- Water). It covers 
some 105 acres and contains various species of fish, more especially 
bream. Trout are likewise abundant, especially in the affluents, as 
are also such smaller fish, as loach, minnows, &c., andcraj^fish swarm 
everywhere. The lake, which has but one outlet into the Yore (the 
Bain), is fed by numerous streams, the three most important of which 
— Cragdale Water, Eaydale and Bardale Becks — unite before entering 
it. The mountains which guard Semerdale — of which Counterside, 
Wetherfell (2015 feet), Greenside (1852 feet). Fleet Moss, Cray Moss, 
the Stake (1818 feet), and Addleborough (1564 feet), are the chief 
summits — vary but little in height, and do not fall below 1000 feet 
until they reach comparatively near to the main river of Yore. Bain- 
bridge, at the outlet of the dale, is 762 feet above sea level, so that 
the actual difference in altitude which the little basin presents is about 
1000 feet. Geologically, so far as the imperfect maps at command 
can show, the formations represented are carboniferous limestone 
in the valley, presenting the usual characteristic scars," and Yore- 
dale Rocks in the upper reaches of the tributary dales, while the 



J 



Roebuck : Semerdale. 



highest summits are capped by millstone grit. The point of junction 
between the base of the Yoreclale rocks and Xhe limestone below is 
w^ell marked on all the streams, more especially at Park Scar on the 
Cragdale Water, by a series of beautiful waterfalls. The hills are 
oovered with coarse grass, or bents, and are much used for pasturage. 
There is no heatherland, only very straggling plants of heather being 
to be found. The district — once the famous Forest of Raydale — is 
now moderately wooded, especially up the Ray dale stream. 

There is marshy ground at the foot of the lake, in which Parnasda 
palustris grows abundantly, and through which, for the first mile of 
its course, the Bain flows with a very sluggish and muddy stream, 
siffording suitable stations for the growth of Potamogetons and the 
yellow water-lily. Its course is afterwards much accelerated, and at 
Bainbridge it dashes over shelving slabs of limestone, afterwards 
joining the Yore opposite Askrigg. 

During the stay of myself and some friends at Bainbridge, which 
was our headquarters for the first fortnight of August, the vicinity of the 
lake and both its shores, together with the three tributary dales, and 
the slopes and summits of some of the hills, were visited. So far 
as natural history was concerned, the only observations made were 
upon the mollusca. Of other things I only recollect seeing specimens 
of the fish I have before mentioned, finding a specimen of Gychrus 
rostratus, and noting the water rat, peewit, magpie, dipper, frog, bull- 
head or miller's thumb, the small garden white, small tortoise-shell and 
small heath butterflies. 

The weather was not very favourable for mollusca, as there was no 
rain whatever till nearly the last day of our stay, and shells were for 
the most part somewhat difficult to find. I now give my list of shells, 
all of which have passed the scrutiny of my friends Messrs. J. W. 
Taylor and William Nelson, to whom I am indebted for assistance in 
determining some of the more critical specimens, as well as confirming 
my own determinations. 

An examination of the subjoined list at once shows that the species 
of the montane or sub-alpine type are represented, usually in abun- 
dance, and that the fluviatile forms are almost entirely absent. I 
failed to detect any shells but Anodonta in the lake itself. The total 
number, twenty-seven only, of species and varieties presents but a 
meagre show, and my expectations of the capabilities of the district, 
based upon its geological and physical aspect, were distinctly disap- 
pointed, though there can be no doubt that further research at another 
season of the year, or under more auspicious meteorological conditions. 



64 



The Naturalist. 



especially if undertaken by a more experienced collector, will add 
various species and varieties to the list. Such a result is still more 
likely if the streams and the woodlands (which I did not exhaustively 
search) are well examined. I do not anticipate, however, that Semer- 
dale will prove a very prolific district, certainly by no means so pro- 
ductive as Mill Gill and Whitfield Gills (situated on the other side of 
the Yore) are. Its climatological conditions are against it. It is of 
a northerly aspect, with the encircling hill-ranges to the south, between 
it and the light and heat of the sun, and thus likely to be more cold 
and bleak than the valleys which are situated on the northern side of 
Wensleydale, facing the south. 

Anodonta anatina, L. Very abundant in Lake Semerwater. 
Limncea truncatula, Miill. Common along road sides near Stalling- 
busk, and near the bridge at Bainbridge. 

Ancylus fiuviatilis var. gibbosa, Bourg. Found near Btallingbusk in 
1877, by Mr. H. Crowther. 

Avion ater, L., the black slug. Abundant about Counterside, Carr 
End, Marsett, Stallingbusk, &c. Ranges altitudinally as high a& 
1500 feet on Ray dale Grainings. 

A. hortensis, Fer. Common on Bainbridge village-green, and near 
Stallingbusk, Marsett, and Counterside. 

Limax agrestis, L., the field slug. This usually common pest was 
abundant everywhere. 

Succinea putris, L. Common at the foot of the Lake ; also found near 
High Blean, and a single dead specimen near the waterfall in Bar- 
dale. 

Yitrina pellucida, Mull. Young specimens abundant under stones on 
Bainbridge village-green ; a few also obtained near Stallingbusk 
and Marsett. 

Zonites cellarius, Mull. One found at Carr End, near Marsett. 

Z. alliarius, Miill. Not uncommon near Bardale Force, Marsett,. 
Counterside, High Blean, and Stallingbusk. 

X nitidulus, Drap. A few specimens found about Marsett, near the 
Knight's Close, and Bardale Falls, and in Bank Wood, Cragdale. 

Z. radiatulus, Aid. Three or four specimens found under stones hj 
the road sides near Stallingbusk. 

Z. crystallinus, Miill. One specimen found in company with the last- 
named.. 



Roebuck : Semerdale. 



55 



Helix hortensis, Miill. Occurs along Scar Top, near Bainbridge. 
H, arbustorum, L. Common along the Scar Top ; occurs also 
about Stallingbusk, Counterside, and in Bardale. 

H. arbusiorum, var. Jiavescens, Moquin-Tandon. With the type, not 

uncommon on Scar Top. 
H, ritfescens, Penn. Near Stallingbusk Church, in Bank Wood, 

Cragdale, and at Carr End, near Marsett, abundant. 

H, hispida, L. Yery common. Scar Top, Bainbridge Yillage-greenj 
round the Lake, about Counterside, Carr End, Stallingbusk and 
High Blean, 

11, sericm^ Miill. One near Semerdale House, and one at Knight 

Close Force, Marsett, 
H. rotundata^ Miill. Common everywhere. 

rupestris, Stud. Common on limestone wails, about Bainbridge, 

Scar Top, Carr End, Stallingbusk, High Blean, Counterside, and in 

Bardale ; also on the summit scars of Addleborough hill (1564 feet 

altitude.) 

Pupa umbilicata, Drap. Common about Bainbridge, Counterside, 
Carr End, Marsett, Bardale waterfall, Stallingbusk, and High 
Blean, and on the summit Scars of Addleborough. 

Vertigo pygmcea^ Drap. A few specimens found near Carr End, in 
damp places. 

Balia perversa, L. Several specimens at Carr End, and a few on Scar 
Top, near Bainbridge. 

Clausilia rugosa, Drap. Not uncommon on Scar Top, about Stalling- 
busk, near Semerdale House, and one at Knight Close Force, near 
Marsett. 

Clausilia rug^sa var. duhia, Drap. Two specimens near the bridge 

over the Bain, at Bainbridge, one on Scar Top and one near 

Stallingbusk. Not common. 
Oochlicopa lubrica, Miill. Common about Bainbridge, High Blean, 

Stallingbusk, Marsett, near Bardale Force, near Semerdale House, 

and at the foot of Semerwater Lake. 

The results of my investigation of the mollusca of other parts of 
Wensleydale will be given in a supplementary paper, to appear in an 
early number of the Naturalist. 

Leeds, Oct. 19th, 1882, 



Late Migrants near Halifax. - Numbers of swallows and also martins 
have during the past week been constantly on the wing in the Kyburne 
Valley. I counted a score yesterday, and many are flying about to-day, 
October 17th.— F. G. S. Rawson. 

Early Migrations of Birds. — On July 10th, whilst working in my 
garden, I heard the well-known cry of gulls, and on looking up, had the 
pleasure of seeing 25 black-headed gulls {Larus ruUbundus) ; they were 
flying due south, and continued to pass over in twos and threes for nearly 
a month. Jnly 27th, five curlews {Numenius arquata) passed over. 
Aug. 5th, on going out at ten o'clock at night, there was a flock of birds 
passing over which were very clamorous, but I could not make out their 
species. Sept. 24th, we have a very large flock of fieldfares {Turdu& 
pilaris) in Mr. John Beaumont's and Mr. R. H. Tolson's parks, at 
Dalton. This is the earliest date I have of them. Sept 27th, a large 
flock of swallows passed over, flying due south ; they were all Hirimdo 
rustica. — James Yarley, Huddersfield, Oct. 16th. 

Bottle-nosed Dolphins. — Boltle-nosed dolphinB ( Delphimis tursio) 
in the H umber and Ouse, have been very numerous this autumn. 
Three were shot several miles above Goole, and Mr. Jno. Harrison has 
handed me a rough sketch of one, with its dimensions. Our mem- 
bers have been very fortunate in finding Volvox qlobator this year. 
The members of the Y. N. U. who attended Snaith meeting, will 
probably remember obtaining a good supply there ; had any of them been 
with Mr. Lord and me on the 7tli inst., we could have shewn them a 
series of ponds or delvings reaching two miles, with Volvox in almost all 
of them. We also found it abundant in a pond at the edge of the moors 
a fortnight since ; I was much surprised at this, as the place was simply 
a pond in a peat bog. -^Thomas Bunker. 

Cychrus rostratus in Semerdale. — On the I7th August last, I found 
a specimen of this rather U3i common though widely distributed beetle 
amongst stones by the road side, at Counterside, a village near the foot 
of Lake Semerwater. — Wm. Denison Roebuck. 

Acherontia Atropos at Huddersfield. — I have received a very fine 
specimen of the death's head moth (Acherontia Atropos) from Mr. Lee,. 
Somerset Road ; it was taken at Brockholes, Sept. 28th last — J. Yarley. 

Entomological Notes. — Bradford. — The season 1882 is without doubt 
the worst we ever experienced. In early spring, Fkigalia pilosaria was not 
nearly so common as usual, and this is the more remarkable when we take 
into consideration the great abundance of larvae feeding in June, 1881. 
Fieris napi, which last year was very abundant, at Shipley Glen, has this 
season scarcely been seen ; Abraxas nlmata seems almost to have dis- 
appeared from Hawksworth, where we usually saw it in thousands, but 
this season it turned up somewhat commonly at Shipley Glen, where, 
a^lthough we have visited the exact spot once, twice, and three times a 
week, for several years, we never saw it before. Larentia salicata has 
not been seen at Shipley Glen, and only one specimen observed in the 



Short Notes and Queries. 



57 



Bingley district ; and a number of other species which are usually 
common, have, this season, rarely been observed. The most interesting 
capture which I made is one specimen of P. stratiotalisy which I took at 
Frizinghall, in July, and which Mr. Porritt informs me has only been 
recorded from three other Yorkshire localities. At the same place I took 
H. 7iymphoealis very abundantly, S. cemhralis Sb few, and P. trigonodac- 
tylus flying over coltsfoot, all of which are new to our district record 
list.— J. W. Carter, 14, Yalley-st., Bradford, Sept. 10th. 

Ichneumons in Yorkshire. — Several ichneumons secured during the 
year have been named for me by Mr. J. B. Bridgman, of Norwich, as 
follows : — Ichneumon luctatorius, L., Grassington, Aug. 7th, 1882. I. 
nigritarms, Gr. , Edlington Wood, Aug. 5th, 1882. ^ I. albicinctus, Gr. , 
Edlington Wood, Aug. 5th, 1882. Feiilissus Jilicornisj (Gr.), variety? 
Lepton Great Wood, near Huddersfield, Sept. 23rd, 1882. "^P. vernalisy 
(Gr.), Yorkshire, June, 1882, (locality not certain.) ^ Tryphon signator, 
Gr., Edlington Wood, Aug. 5th, 1882. Those marked ^ are new to the 
Yorkshire list. — Geo. T. Porritt. 

New Yorkshire Mosses. — I have collected the following mosses which 
are not recorded for Yorkshire in the London catalogue of British mosses 
and hepatics : — Gymnostomum. tortile, Schwg. Ingleborough, at 2000 feet, 
and Malham, above the Cove, at 1100 feet ; Sphagnum cuspidatum, 
Ehrh., var. falcatum, Russ. Baildon Moor ; S. subsecundum, Nees., 
var. awiculatum, Schpr., Adel ; and S. cymbifolium, Ehrh., var., con- 
gestum, Schpr. Whernside, Baildon, &c.~W. West. 

The Effects of Weather on Insects : By Miss Ormerod. — This 
lady, the well-known entomologist, has recently delivered a lecture on 
the above subject, at the Royal Agricultural College, to a large number 
of students, under the presidency of the Principal, the Rev. J. B. 
McClellan, which we think deserves to be widely known. We therefore 
make no apology for inserting a short abstract of her remarks, which, 
though perhaps in some respects not new to many entomologists, 
yet must interest all. The lecture was principally directed to the effects 
of rain, frost, heat, drought, &c., on insect life, and the methods by 
which these influences may be brought to bear practically in the course of 
common agricultural treatment in diminishing the amount of insects 
injurious to our crops. Miss Ormerod showed how, in addition to its 
direct influence on insect life, the efiects of the weather may be traced 
for one, two, or more years in its promotion of the growth of special 
weeds, as, for instance, charlock, which may be the food-plant of some 
special crop pest, and also in its interference with the regularity of 
measures of cultivation by which plant and vermin are usually cleared 
out. Reasons were advanced why common farm insects were uninjured 
by even extreme cold, it being shown that they select some special locality 
under leaves or stones, or form a cell, or in some way supply themselves 
with shelter^ and there they pass into a quiet, motionless state, the animal 



58 



The Naturalist. 



functions decreasing in power with the increase of the cold. Still, even 
if totally frozen, many kinds of caterpillars are not injured so long as the 
freezing takes place in the shelters they have made for themselves. In 
the earth-cells, in which many kinds of caterpillars or grubs pass the 
winter, they are protected fiom drying winds and sudden changes of 
temperature, and these cells also appear to exclude the wet, so that the 
caterpillar lies clean and dry within, without risk of its breathing pores 
being choked by mud, which, though possibly not of importance to it 
while torpid, is a very serious matter when it wakes from its wintry sleep. 
It appears, in fact, that so long as they are in their own cells these 
common farm pests will survive a greater amount of cold than is likely to 
occur in these islands. If they are not in their own cells, circumstances 
will affect them very differently : and if, by ploughing, digging, or any 
other operation, the caterpillars and chrysalids can be thrown out of their 
cells or other wintry defences, and scattering them, mixing them with the 
soil and exposing them to drying winds, to alternate freezing and thawing, 
or to lying soddening in the rain or wet ground, when too torpid to move, 
that thus great numbers are got rid of. Thus, in the case of the maggots 
and pupae of some kinds of the diptera (or two-winged flies) we may throw 
them on the surface, or turn them down so deeply in autumn cultivation, 
that any flies that may develop will have no power to work their way 
through the quantity of earth above them ; and the best known remedy 
for the wheat midge is the method in which this plan is carried out in 
Canada and the United States of America. This is, when the red 
maggot " is lying at the bottom of the stubble or a little below the surface 
in autumn, to skim off with the first turn-furrow of the plough about two 
inches of the surface-soil, with all the stubble, weeds, and vermin in it, 
and turn it to the bottom of the furrow ; then raise another slice with 
the second turn-furrow, and throwing it over the first, bury it some 
inches deep. By this means the pest may be got rid of, if the surface can 
be left undisturbed until after the natural time of development for the 
wheat midge in the following season has passed ; for even if these gnat- 
flies develop, their delicate powers are quite unsuited for piercing through 
the firm ground above them, and consequently they perish. It is, how- 
ever, necessary that the ground should not be turned up again too soon, 
or the chrysalids or maggots in their cases may develop, and we shall have 
no benefit from their temporary burial. In the case of saw-flies, the 
cocoons may be thrown out in scores from under gooseberry bushes ; in 
masses as large as a man's fist from under the pine-trees they have infested 
in autumn ; and, in the case of beetle larvae or chrysalids, we may get rid 
of some very injurious ones in this way ; but the wire worm, having the 
instinct to bury itself when the weather is too cold for feeding, can only 
occasionally be dealt with in a torpid state ; and the cockchafer-grubs, 
which are a great pest, also bury themselves safely too deep to be easily 
reached. In many cases the egg, whether laid singly or in clusters, is so 
placed as to be protected from rapid drying or sudden changes of temper- 



Rainfall for September. 



59 



ature. This locality is often either a little below the surface of the 
ground, as with one or more of the onion flies, the carrot fly, cabbage-root 
flies, and others, or amongst damp herbage, or on, or close to, the plants 
at the ground level, as with the daddy-longlegs or the click beetle (from 
whose eggs we are infested with the wireworm) ; and many others lay 
similarly. 

(To he continued.) 



^ahtfall for S^pttmhr. 





Height 

of 
gauge 


Rain- 
fall! 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




above 


Days 






Fall. 




sea 
level. 






1882. 


1881. 




HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
1-64 


17 


24-68 


* 23-63 


30 


0-26 


Halifax...(F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


1-86 


11 


35-94 


32-34 






Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


1-135 


17 


19-440 


tl7-912 


27 


0-480 


HORSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


2-070 


19 


24-620 


J23-459 


27 


0-340 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


•71 


15 


22-01 


18-52 


27 


0-72 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


3-18 


16 


30-97 


28-30 


19 


0-72 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


2-90 


15 


23-40 


21-56 


26 


0-59 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


1-49 


17 


22-51 


18-92 


1 


0-37 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


1 " 


1 1-43 


17 


1 16-169 

1 


19-72 


1 


0-37 



* Average to date for 16 years, 1866-81. f Average of 28 years, 1853-62 & 1865-82. 
J Average of 13 years, 1870-82. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Oct. 10th, Mr. T. Lister 
in the chair. — An interesting paper was read by Mr. Frankland on 

Early Reminiscences of Birds and their Eggs, among the Cleveland 
Hills." The botanical section have added to their long list several 
flowering plants, amongst them — Aug. 29, Epilohium angustifolium, 
Sparganium simplex, Solaniim nigrum ; Sept. 25, Cerastium aqiiaticum, 
Bedum telephium, Nupharlutea ; Sept. 7th, Reseda luteola ; 27th, Clematis 
vitalha, Antirrhimim Orontium. Few insects have been observed, amongst 
them being Nonagria fulva and Celoena Haworthii — the first new to the 
district. Amongst birds noted are, nightjar Aug. 21, whitethroat Sep. 5, 
landrail 19th, male gold crest and landrail 22nd ; magpie, grey linnet, 
and twite numerous at Ingbirchworth ; larks in song ; swallows and 
martins in flocks at Stainborough Park ; straggling instances of swallows 
in Cockshaw-road, near Barnsley, 28th ; martin Oct. 2nd ; swallows in 
flock at Monkbretton Grange — the last seen by bhe chairman. Great 
spotted woodpeckers, jays, and kingfishers noted near Barnsley. — T. 



60 



The Naturalist. 



Bradford Natthialists' Society. — Meeting Aug. 22nd, the president 
in the chair, who gave a number of interesting extracts from his entomo- 
logical diary, dealing more particularly with species of lepidoptera 
peculiar to the Fens. Mr. B. Illingworth described rambles to Grange, 
Witherslack, and Kendal, and remarked upon the enormous number of 
wasps' nests observed at the latter place. Mrs. Broadley exhibited several 
marine objects, including razor-shell, &c. ; Mr. Carter, Helix lapicida 
from Burn sail ; Mr. Illingworth E. Blandina from Grange ; and Mr. 
Soppitt G. catenidatus from Heaton Woods. 

Meeting Sept. 5th, the president in the chair. — Mr. Firth exhibited 
0. filigramm,aria from Rombalds Moor (Wharfedale), and L. oUvata from 
Shipley Glen : Mr. Carter M, flammea from Wicken Fen, received from 
Mr. Porritt ; P. alpina from Perthshire, 1881 ; P. trigonodadylus from 
Frizinghall ; T. caudana and P. solandrimia from Rawdon ; Mr. Illing- 
worth a large number of V. Antiopa from America ; Mr. Terry P.phlceas 
from Rawdon, M. arcuosa, M. ruhiginata, and a large number of com- 
moner species from Shipley Glen, and a peculiarly marked specimen of 
P. brassicce from the South, which gave rise to an animated discussion. 
Mr. West showed specimens of the pearl mussel ( Vnio margaritifer) from 
Ireland ; Mr. Soppitt Acme lineata, Balea perversa and Carychiura mini- 
mum, from Ingleton, Helix pidchella from Otley, and the following plants : 
Ceterach officinariim from Poole, and Filago germanica from Baildon. A 
subscription list towards the Darwin Memorial Fund " was commenced 
by the members. 

Meeting Sept. 19th, Mr. Fawcett in the chair.— Mr. Scorah gave an 
interesting lecture on Micro-Photography." Mr. Illingworth exhibited 
0. Jiligrammaria from Rombalds Moor (Airedale), N. fulva and N, 
glareosa from Shipley Glen, L. Alexis and P. phlceas from Blackpool ; 
Messrs. Soppitt and Firth gave accounts of the recent meeting of the 
Y.N.U. at Wakefield, and Mr. Soppitt remarked that the district was 
extremely rich in fungi. 

Meeting Oct. 3rd, Mr. Soppitt, v. p., in the chair. — The evening was 
devoted to conversation and the exhibition of specimens, of which a good 
n amber were laid on the table. Mr. Bennett showed beautiful fruiting 
specimens of Hippophae rhamnoides from Skegness ; Mr. Soppitt, on 
behalf of the Vicar of Arncliffe (the Rev. W. Boyd, M. A.), fine mounted 
specimens of Folcmoniiim ccerideum and Dryas octopetala, from Arnclifib 
Clouders, the only Yorkshire habitat for the latter species ; Mr. Oxley, a 
large number of plants from Derbyshire and Cheshire, amongst which 
were a number of rare species collected by Mr. Searle, including Colchi- 
cum antumnale, Festuca sylvatica, Hordeiim sylvatica, Campanula latifolia, 
Vaccinium vitis-idoea (in fl. ) and Ulex nanus. Mr. West showed several 
species of local fungi, amongst which was a fine specimen of Moiridius 
lachrymans (dry rot fungus), from the cellar of Mr. Henry Ripley, of 
Bradford ; also a large number of foreign marine shells. — J. W. Carter, 
Hon. Sec« 



Kepokts of Societies. 



61 



Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society— Monthly 
meeting, Sept. 25th, in the Free Library, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) 
in the chair. — Mr. Benjamin Cooke, of Southport, read a paper on 

Classification," as applied to British insects. He recommended the 
adoption of a sj^stem of arrangement based on the character of the 
metamorphosis undergone in the earlier stages, as preferable to a system 
founded on the structure of the perfect insect only. Mr. Cooke also 
considered that in each order the carnivorous species should take prece- 
dence, on account of the greater amount of difi"erentiation in the organs 
of the mouth. During the conversazione which followed the meeting, Mr. 
Cooke exhibited specimens of Rhyssa pnrsnasoria, from the New Forest, 
Hampshire ; Mr. Walker, preserved larvae of Agrotis Ashworthii ; and 
Mr. J. Wall (under the microscope), specimens of the house-fly infested 
with parasites. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — Monthly meeting, Sept. 13th, 
Captain CunlifFe presiding. — Several of the members had recently made 
excursions to the Breadalbane mountains, and exhibited some of the 
rarities brought home from that district ; Mr. Squire Ashton showed 
specimens of Timmia, Ulota Lndwigii, and Hypnum Oahesii ; Captain 
Cunliffe, specimens of Orthofhecium rufescens, Dicranella squarrosa, and 
Siylostegium ccespiticinm. All the parties had found the beautiful Hypnum 
crista-castrenses fruiting more abundantly this year than had hitherto been 
seen, and Mr. AsliLon had very kindly made up a few packets for dis- 
tribution. Mr Wm. Horsfall contributed freshly gathered specimens of 
Cryphcea heteromalla from Tenby. Mr. H. Boswell, of Oxford, sent 
specimens of a Sjjhag^ium new to Britain, which he had discovered at 
Whitchurch, Salop. It had hitherto been found only in America, where 
it is known as Sphagnum Torreyanum (Sullv.) Mr. Boswell also sent 
specimens of Sphagnum intermedium j var. pulchrum (one of the prettiest 
of the bog mosses), from the same locality, and Tortula princeps from 
Blair Athol. The hon. sec. exhibited several species of frondose hepatics 
from Southport, the Pallavicinia hihernica being remarkable for its 
strongly pungent odour when dry. — Thos. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 

Meeting, October 11th, Capt. Cunlifib in the chair. — Mr. James Cash 
exhibited and distributed specimens of a moss which he had collected on 
Meal Tarmechan, during an excursion to the Highlands in company of 
the vice-president, in September last, and which he had now determined 
by microscopical examination to be the rare Myiirella apicidatci. Mr. 
Cash also exhibite 1 a few interesting mosses he had gathered in Mont- 
gomery during the present month (October), Scleropodium ccespitosum. 
Myrinia pnlvinata, and Tortula latifolia being amongst the number. The 
two latter species are new records for that district. Mr. W. H. Pearson, 
specimens of the new hepatics described by Dr. Spruce in his recent 
memoir on the Cephalozice, namely, Cephalozia leucantha, (Spruce) 
collected by Mr. Sim near Banchory, Scotland, and C. oeraria (Pearson) 
from the mouth of an old copper mine near Tyn-y-groes, N. Wales ; also 
the following : — Jung. Helleriana, Nees, a species new to Britain, 



62 



The Naturalist. 



collected by Mr. G. Stabler at Mardale, Westmoreland ; the rare Marsil- 
pella Stahleri, found on Cader Idris by Mr. G. A. Holt — this being new 
to Wales ; specimens of Harpanthiis scutatus, from Tyn-y-groes, collected 
by Mr. C. J. Wild — a rare species only previously found in Wales at 
Beddgelert, — and Anthelia Juratzkana from Ben Lavigh, collected by 
Mr. Peter Ewing, this being the second station in Britain for this rare 
hepatic. — T. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 

Scarborough Scientific Society. — The annual fungus foray took 
place on Saturday, September 30th. The day was fine, and the ramble 
much enjoyed by an enthusiastic party of mycologists. Fungi were in 
abundance, and some interesting specimens collected : Ag. {Amanita) 
excelsus, Ag. (Myc&na) rosellus, and Cortinarium russus, by Mr. W. 
Robinson; Ag. (Omphalia) Postii, new to Britain, and Ag. {Amanita) 
Fi'iesii, by Mr. G. Massee, The exhibition was held in the Society's 
room, and being open to the public in the evening, was visited by con- 
siderable numbers . The common kinds were arranged according to their 
edible or poisonous properties. — G. M. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Thirsk, Oct. 7th. — The sixth and 
closing meeting of 1882 was planned for the investigation of Pilmoor, a 
tract of waste land adjoining the main line of the North Eastern Railway. 
The meeting was fixed to be at Thirsk J unction, and parties were organ- 
ised for Leckby Carr and Gormire Lake. Unfortunately for the success 
of the first meeting ever held so late as October, the weather was very 
unpropidous, rain falling throughout the day. The attendance was con- 
sequently the smallest ever known at a Union meeting, only ten members 
being present. The excursion was nevertheless a successful one, so far 
as the results were concerned. Three parties were arranged. One con- 
sisted of Messrs. Soppitt and Roebuck, accompanied by Mr. R. Thackwray, 
of Brafierton, as guide. The route taken was over Pilmoor, through 
Brafferton Spring Wood, thence to Raskelf, and along the borders of 
Sessay Wood to Pilmoor Junction, and by rail to Thirsk Junction. 
Upwards of a hundred species of fungi were collected, and a few mollusca. 
The second party included Messrs. William Foggitt and Robert Lee, of 
Thirsk, and a gentleman from Darlington, who investigated the botany 
of Leckby Carr, attention being also paid to the birds. The third party 
drove to Gormire, and included Messrs. Percy Lund, B. M. Smith, Moss, 
and Hey, the Rev. F. Addison and the local secretary acting as leaders. 
The main object of this detachment was the geological examination of the 
escarpments of the Hambleton hills, and some attention was paid to the 
mollusca. The tea and meeting were held at Strickland's hotel, Thirsk 
Junction. The chair of the general meeting was occupied by Mr. H. T. 
Soppitt, of Bradford. The minutes of the Wakefield meeting were con- 
firmed, and upon calling the roll it was found that the following seven 
societies were represented : Bradford (2), Ilkley, Leeds (3), and Ripon. 
The list of new subscribers included Prof. L. C. Miall, F.L.S., F.G.S., 



Reports of Societies. 



6B 



Leeds, Mr. John Rookledge, F.R.M.S., of Easingwold, Mr. H. Jowitt, 
of Bishop Thornton, and the Rev. Frederick Addison, of Thirsk. Mr. 

B. M. Smith, the secretary of the Ripon Naturalists' Club, proposed a 
vote of thanks to Mr. Wm. Gregson for his services as local secretary, 
and to Viscount Downe, Capt. Gallwey, and Messrs. B. T. Woodd and 

C. F. H. Bolckow, for permission to visit their respective estates. This was 
seconded and carried. The reports of sections were then given, beginning 
with the geological, for which Mr. Gregson reported that they had visited 
the glacial beds in the gravel pits adjoining Thirsk Junction, and found 
therein shap granite, encrinital limestone, several water-worn gryphese, 
also Cristellaria rotulata, and Astarte striato-sulcata. The party then 
drove to the western escarpment of the Hambleton hills, where they 
investigated sections of the middle and lower oolites, and also some of the 
upper liassic strata. The middle oolites are represented in the 
face of the cliff by about 30 feet of Oxford clay, between 100 feet 
of calcareous grits above, and the same thickness of Kelloway rock 
below. They succeeded in finding several sjDecies of Belemnites, 
Ammonites communis, A. Boulbiensis, Gryphea incurva, G. convoluta, 
Grevillia erosa, Pleuromya granata, P. contracta, Leda galathea, 
Rhynchonella plicatissima, Pecten substriatus, &c. Mr. W. Eagle 
Clarke, secretary of the Vertebrate Section, reported that the only 
observations in ornithology had been those made at Leckby Carr 
by Mr. Robert Lee, who had seen thirteen common residents— the 
starling, rook, jackdaw, magpie, goldcrest, wood pigeon, meadow pipit, 

- redbreast, yellow -hammer, common bunting, blue-tit, chaffinch, and lap- 
wing. Of other vertebrata had been observed, both at Leckby Carr and 
Pilmoor, the squirrel, weasel, water vole, toad, frog, and common or 
smooth newt. In the absence of the officers of the Conch ological Section, 
Mr. Wm. Denison Roebuck stated that shells had been collected by each 
of the three parties out during the day, but that the total list was only a 
meagre one. Mr. Soppitt and himself, who had visited Pilmoor, Braf- 
ferton Spring Wood, and the lanes north-west of Raskelf, had not been 
as successful as they expected, having only found 16 species and varie- 
ties, viz. :— Planorbis complanatus, P. corneus, P. contortus, Limnea 
truncatuia, Arion ater and var. rufus, A. hortensis, Limax agrestis and 
Mr. Butterell's newly-described var. niger ; Vitrina pellucida, Zonites 
alliarius, Helix nemoralis, H. cantiana, H. hispida. Vertigo pygmsea, 
and Cochlicopa lubrica. Mr. W. Foggitt obtained, at Leckby Carr, 
specimens of Helix hortensis, H. canti;ina, and H. hispida. Mr. Percy 
Lund, of Ukley, and some of the Ripon members, who had had the 
advantage of collecting upon calcareous soil — the slopes of the oolitic 
escarpments above Gormire Lake, — obtained Zonites cellarius. Helix 
nemoralis, H. hortensis, H. arbustorum, H. cantiana, H. hispida, H. 
rotundata, H. lapicida, Bulimus obscurus, Clausilia rugosa, and C. 
laminata. In the absence of the officers of the Entomological Section, 
there was no report given, but from statements made by various mem- 



64 



The Naturalist. 



bers, it appeared that Carabus violaceus had been found at Pilmoor, and 
Bombiis leucorum noted there and at Gormire, the individuals of the 
latter species being in both cases females in their hybernaculum, or 
winter resting-place. The Botanical Section was unrepresented by its 
officers, and Mr. Wm. Foggitt, of Thirsk, reported that, notwithstanding 
the lateness of the season and the very unfavourable weather, 235 phaner- 
ogams and a considerable number of cryptogams had been collected or 
seen ; the former included Berberis vulgaris, Drosera rotundifolia, and 
anglica, Silene anglica and noctiflora, Trifolium arvense, Comarum 
palustre, Pimpinella magna, Oenanthe phellandrium, Torilis nodosa, 
Sambucus ebulus, Scabiosa columbaria, Artemisia absinthium, Filago 
minima, Gnaphalium sylvaticum, Erigeron acris, Crepis paludosa, 
Vaccinium oxycoccos, Hieracium tridentatum, Origanum vulgare, 
Calamintha clinopodium, Acinos and menthifolia, Nepeta cataria, 
Lysimachia thyrsiflora, Rhynchospora alba, Hordeum murinum, all 
from Leckby Carr and neighbourhood. The interesting fungus Geo- 
glossum difforme was exhibited from the sandstone quarry at Leckby. 
Twenty-five species of mosses were gathered, among which were the 
following : — Sphagnum acutifolium, var. rubellum, S. intermedium, S. 
cuspidatum, S. subsecundum, S. rigidum, Campylopus pyriformis (ft.), 
Bryum atropurpureum, Aulacomnium palustre (ft.), A. androgynum, 
Tetraphis pellucida (ft ), and Brachythecium albicans. Six species of 
hepatics were gathered, Mylia anomala being among them. Mr. Soppitt 
supplemented the remarks of Mr. Foggitt by an account of the day's 
investigation of fungi, which had been found very abundant. The 
district investigated was Pilmoor, BrafFerton, Spring-wood, Sessay Wood, 
&c., and resulted in 92 specimens of fungi being collected ; amongst these 
were Collybia maculatus, C. tuberosus, Pholiota radicosus, P. squarrosus, 
Sphseronema subulatum, Bussula nigricans, Cortinarius cserulescens, 
C. torus, Torrubia ophioglossoides, Lactarius vellereus, L. piperatus. 
Boletus luteus, B. scaber, B. elegans (Leckby Carr), Polyporus salicinus. 
Scleroderma verrucosum (Leckby Carr), and Puccinia clinopodii. [A 
short distance above Sessay, I noticed Phragmidium bulbosum ("at least 
what I took to be that species) exceedingly common, the pustules on some 
of the plants rather small and not so scattered, whilst on others, the 
pustules were very much larger and scattered all over the leaf. Upon 
examination, I found that the spores differed considerably, especially 
in the smaller pustules, the septa being more numerous, and the apiculus 
much longer than in the larger pustules. Both forms were sent to Mr. 
C. B. Plowright, who replied : — The two phragmidia are distinct 
species, hitherto in this country confounded together as P. bulbosum. 
That with fewest septa is P. violaceum, Schultz. ; that with most, P. rubi, 
Pers. — the old bulbosum."] Mycologists would do well to examine their 
P. bulbosum. Yotes of thanks to Mr Foggitt and the Rev. F. Addison, 
for acting as guides, and to the chairman, closed the proceedings. — 
W. D. R. 



ON THE CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS. 



By Benjamin Cooke. 

Some of the ideas in this paper were produced at a meeting of the 
Northern Entomological Society, held on the 26th December, 1857. 
My views are now somewhat modified as to the details of an arrange- 
ment of the class Lisecta, but I still adhere to the principle of 
classification which was advocated in that paper — a principle which 
was not new, but has been acted upon in the arrangement of more 
than one order of insects. 

Mr. Dallas, in his ^'Elements of Entomology," after stating his 
reasons for the adoption of the Cibarian system of classification, in his 
work says (p. 58) — But, for my own part, I must confess that I 
think the adoption of the metamorphoses as the foundation of the 
arrangement of inseols leads to a more philosophical result." Coin- 
ciding with Mr. Dallas in this vievv', my object is to carry out this 
system, and to endeavour to show that the orders of insects follow one 
another in a more natural and regular course than in the system of 
classificalion which is founded on the structure of the mouth. 

The principle of classification which will be here advocated is this : 
to begin with the highest development, and proceed in regular 
gradation to the lowest ; care being taken in the details to associate 
together those which have a close affinity throughout the various 
stages of their existence. This principle seems to me to be applicable 
to all classes of animated beings. It is not new, as I stated before ; 
and, whether accepted or not, it is manifest that unless some principle 
be adopted, classification will always be in confusion. 

It is obvious that carnivorous animals which prey upon others 
belonging to the same order as themselves, will possess tho highest 
development; their muscular powers in proportion to their size, their 
strength of bone and of jaws, and their agility, are all necessarily 
greater than those of animals which they have to subsist upon. The 
predaceous tribes, then, whenever such exist, should be placed at the 
head of each order : thus, in the mammals, the lion, the tiger, the 
leopard, &c. ; in the bird^, the eagles and falcons still claim the highest 
rank. There are exceptions to this rule in the case of insects which 
are only partly predaceous, and of inferior structure ; these will have 
to be arranged along with the nearest allies. 

In order to show the necessity for some guiding principle in the 

arrangement of insects, I give, in a tabular form, the systems proposed 

by those British authors who have published their views in a separate 
N.S., Vol. vm., Dec, 1882. 



^6 



The Naturalist. 



form, on the whole of the class Inseda, or rather the whole of the 
British insects ; omitting the orders Dermaptera, Dictyoptera, Strep- 
siptera, Aphaniptera, Homaloptera, and Aptera, for reasons to be 
afterwards explained. The works from which the table is taken are 
— Systematic Catalogue of British Insects," by Stephens, date 1829 ; 
" Guide to an Arrangement of British Insects," by Curtis, date 1829 ; 

Introduction to the Modern Classification of Insects," the " Synopsis 
of the Genera of British Insects," at the end of the second volume, by 
Westwood, date 1840; "The Insect Hunters," by Newman, published 
about the end of 1857. This last work I did not see or know any- 
thing about until after my paper for the Northern Entomological 
Society was read. It is based on the Metamorphotic system, whilst 
the other authors have adopted the Cibarian. 



STEPHENS. 



1. Coleoptera 

2. Orthoptera 

3. Neuroptera 

4. Trichoptera 

5. Hymenoptera 

6. Lepidoptera 

7. Diptera 

8. Hemiptera 

9. Homoptera 



CURTIS. 



1. Coleoptera 

2. Orthoptera 

3. Hymenoptera 

4. Neuroptera 

5. Trichoptera 

6. Lepidoptera 

7. Homoptera 

8. Hemiptera 

9. Diptera 



WESTWOOD. 



1. Coleoptera 

2. Orthoptera 

3. Thysauoptera 

4. Neuroptera 

5. Trichoptera 

6. Hymenoptera 

7. Lepidoptera 

8. Homoptera 

9. Heteroptera 

10. Diptera 



NEWMAN, 



1. Lepidoptera 

2. Diptera 

3. Hymenoptera 

4. Coleoptera 

5. Stegoptera 

6. Neuroptera 

7. Orthoptera 

8. Hemiptera 



It will be seen that three of our authors commence with the order 
Coleoptera, and Westwood states his reason for so doing. He says : 

This order comprises the extensive tribes of beetles, and, in respect 
to the size of some of these insects, or the number of individual 
species, must be regarded as occupying the foremost rank among 
insects." {Introd. i., p. 33.) 

The omission of the orders before-mentioned has now to be 
explained. The Dermaptera, Leach, or Euplexoptera, Westw., con- 
taining the family Forficulidse, also the Dictyoptera, or Blattid^e, will 
be included with the Orthoptera. The Strepsiptera, or Stylopidae, 
are considered to belong to the Coleoptera. The Aphaniptera, or 
Pulicidse, and the Homaloptera, containing the families Hippoboscidae 
and Nycteribidae, are both placed among the Diptera. There remains 
then the order Aptera to be disposed of. Curtis divides it into tAvo 
orders, viz., Thysanura and Anoplura. Sir John Lubbock, in his 



Cooke: On tHe Clapstfication of Ixsrcts, 



G7 



Monograph of the Collembola and Thysanura/' does not seem to 
regard them as belonging strictly to the class Insecta, though nearer 
to this class than they are to the Crustacea or Arachnida. According 
to Stephens the order Aptera consists of the two families Pediculidae 
and Mirmidse. Now it is possible that the Pediculida^, or at least the 
greater portion of them, will have to be associated with the Hemiptera. 
Of the Nirmidse, most of which are called bird-lice, I will not express 
an opinion, except that they ought not to form a distinct order of 
insects. 

Restricting, then, the class Insecta as it has been done by Westwood 
and by Newman, and carrying out the metamorphotic system of 
arrangement, the class will be separable first of all, into two divisions, 
which may be characterised thus : 

Division I. Division II. 

Pupa unable to feed. Pupa able to feed. 

In the second division the pupa is as active and voracious as the 
larva, and in some cases more so. In the first division there is much 
difference in the power of motion possessed by the pupa, and this is 
most evident among the Diptera ; in a large proportion of this order 
the pupa is wholly incapable of any motion : whilst of those which 
live in the water up to the time of their assuming the perfect state, 
the pupse of some families possess considerable power of motion. 

I will now proceed to state my views as to the number of orders in 
the class Insecta, and as to their arrangement on the principle of 
commencing with the highest development. The following table 
exhibits six orders in the first division, and six orders in the second, 
viz : — 



Division I. 

1. Coleoptera 

2. Hymenoptera 

3. Diptera 

4. Lepidoptera 

5. Trichoptera (caddis-flies) 

6. Stegoptera (Newman in part 

Neuroptera planipennia 



Division II. 

1. Neuroptera odonata (Dra- 

gon-flies only) 

2. Neuroptera Hetera 

3. Orthoptera 

4. Hemiptera. 

5. Ho m opt era 

6. Thysanoptera (Haliday) 



1. Coleoptera. — In the year 1861 Waterhouse published a Cata« 
logue of British Coleoptera," in three forms, one of which was intended 
for labelling cabinets — a most valuable boon to collectors and students 
of this order at that time. The arrangement w^as purely a tarsal one. 
After ten years, when the number of British species had considerably 



68 



The Naturalist. 



increased, another catalogue was issued by Dr. Sharp, which I believe 
•is now generally accepted by British coleopterists. It differs chiefly 
from the preceding in the removal of the Trichopterygidae, Pselaphidae, 
&c., from the Pseudotrimera, to positions of nearer alliance ; also in 
the restoration of the Hydrophilidae to a nearer connexion with the 
Dytiscid{». The principle of the arrangement seems to my mind 
exactly the one which I have been advocating or supporting, and I 
consider Dr. Sharp's catalogue to be a model for the arrangement of 
all other orders of insects. If the principle is a good one as regards 
the Coleoptera, I cannot conceive any reason why it should not be 
carried out in the whole class. 

The arrangement of the Coleoptera may be compared to the railway 
system : if a person wishes to travel from Chester to Southporfc, he 
takes the train to Birkenhead, and he there comes to a terminus ; he 
crosses the river in a steam-boat, and then makes his way to Tithe- 
barn- street station, in Liverpool, where he enters upon a distinct line 
of railway. So it is with the beetles ; when we get through the 
Geodephaga and Hydradephaga, we come to a terminus, and then 
change to another line, as it were, going on with the Brachelytra. 

2. Hymen OPT ERA. — There may be a choice, in the commencement 
of this order, between the ants and the wasps ; I prefer the latter, and 
if we begin the British species with Vespa crabro, we have a fine and a 
formidable insect to take the lead. To get into a hornet's nest is 
proverbial ; to get into an ant's nest would be, comparatively, a weak 
expression. 

B. DiPTERA. — In his investigations on the Hymenoptera, Westwood 
says (Introd.. vol 2, p. 81) : — ^' It seems to be admitted on all hands 
that the insects, which are the real analogues of the present order 
(Hymenoptera) exist in the dipterous order, almost every hymenopte- 
rous group having its representative in the latter." 

In arranging this order on the same principle as the Coleoptera, 
there can scarcely be two opinions as to which family to begin with. 
Walker says of the Asilidce Insecta Britannica — Diptera/' vol. 1, 
p. 47) — ^' These flies are ail carnivorous, and are the most powerful 
and generally the largest of the Diptera. They destroy Coleoptera and 
Hymenoptera, as well as insects of their own class." 

4. Lepidoptera. — Three out of the four British authors before 
mentioned commence the British species of this order with Papilio 
MacJiaon ; and I believe this commencement is almost universal with 
British lepidopterists of the present day. Here, then, we have the 



Cooke : On the Classification of I^:sECTs. 



69 



same principle in operation, which seems to have been the guiding 
one in the arrangement of the ColeopLera. The British butterflies are 
so few in number of species, that we have nothing to compare with 
the magnificent genus Ornithoptera of Java, Sumatra, and Borneo, 
which takes the lead in a general collection. 

5. Teichoptera. — This order is intended to contain the insects 
commonly known as caddis-flies only — in fact the species monographed 
by M'Lachlan under this title. He has recently revised, and I think 
improved, the arrangement of the British species, beginning with the 
genus Neuronia and ending with the minute species, that is to say the 
family Hydroptilidae. It would be difficult, now to find any departure 
from the principle of classification advocated in this paper. 

6. Stegopteea. — Xewman includes the caddis-flies along with the 
Neuroptera-Planipennia under the title proposed. If it be permitted 
to restrict the name to the latter insects as a separate order, the title is 
surely Avorth retaining in preference to Neuroptera-planipennia, which 
was proposed only as a division of the Linnsean order. The separation 
of these insects into a distinct order is not a proposal of mine ; I only 
advocate its adoption. M'Lachlan has monographed the British 
species, but if we are to deal with them on the san^e principle as with 
the Trichoptera, the arrangement will want revising. 

This order terminates the first division of tlie class Insecta, and I 
think there may be observed a regular gradation from a hard-bodied, 
strong, and well-defended class of insects, to a soft-bodied, weak, and 
defenceless one. 

Division II. Order 1. — Neueoptera Odonata. — It will be 
observed that I propose to separate the Neuroptera of Linnaeus into 
four distinct orders — two belonging to the first division of the Insecta, 
and two to the second, according 'to the nature of the metamorphosis. 
Fabricius proposed the Odonata for the dragon-flies, and I do not like 
to drop the title of Neuroptera, as it is done in the two orders in the 
first division : hence the combination. I believe, also, that Fabricius 
considered the Odonata to form a distinct order, therefore there is 
nothing new in the proposition which I make ; it is only an attempt 
to restore that which has been allowed to drop. The rea.-son for so 
doing is this : it has become very evident of late years that the sexual 
characters of insects, the genitalia and their armature including the 
anal appendages, are of high value in classification, and also as a test 
in the distinction of species. Now, the male genitalia of the dragon- 
flies differ from all other insects, so far as I am aware, in being 
situated, not at the tip of the abdomen, but at its base underneath- 



70 



The Naturalist. 



This of itself one would think sufficient to separate them as a distinct 
order. An opportunity of witnessing the pairing of these insects may 
perhaps not often occur. I had once a most favourable one, and the 
species noticed was one of the larger kind. It was in a part of the 
New Forest, Hampshire, in September, 185G, and remembering wLat 
Westwood says on the subject (Introd., vol. 2, p. 38), I did not 
neglect this opportunity. Without going into particulars, I was 
perfectly satisfied of the truth of the statement alluded to, and tl: it 
Burmeister's assertion to the contrary is without foundation. I may 
add that, after pairing, the male does not let go his hold of the other 
sex by the back of the neck, but assists her in the act of ovipositicm. 

Besides the above distinction, the Odonata has no close relationship 
with any other tribe in the Neuroptera of Linnseus. Their eminently 
predaceous habits, their rapid and graceful flight, their very large eyes, 
their powerful jaws,' their antennse — in fact their whole organisation, 
places them at a great distance above the insects which will compose 
the next order. 

2. Neuroptera-hetera. — This order will contain the families 
Perlidae, Ephemeridae, and Psocidse ; the Termitidae not being natives 
of Britain. 

3. Orthoptera. — The species of insects belonging to this order, 
and inhabiting Britain, are few. They are comprised in the following 
families : — Blattidse, Forficulidse, Achetidae, Gryllidae, and Locustidse. 

4. Hemiptera. — It will be seen that three of our British authors 
separate the Homoptera as an order distinct from the Hemiptera 
proper, and I think they have done wisely. The tendency in the 
present day is to multiply families and genera, many of the proposed 
families in the Hemiptera being represented by only one or two 
British species. And if entomologists agree with the authors alluded 
to, each of the two orders will contain far more British species than 
there are in each of the preceding. 

There being no British species analogous to the Geodephaga among 
the Coleoptera, the order will commence with those which represent 
the Hydradephaga, namely, Notonectidae, Hydrometridae, &c. ; and 
this has been done by both Curtis and Westwood. The tribe 
Eeduvina contains predaceous insects, but of inferior construction, and 
are more nearly related to the Anthocorina. 

5. Homoptera. — The catalogue of these insects, published by the 
Entomological Society of London in 1876, does not include the 
Aphidae and Coccidae, and the arrangement is somewhat novel to 
British entomologists. 



Cooke: Homopteka of Lancashike and Cheshire. 71 



6. Thysanopteea. — This order, consisting of the single family 
Thripidse (all very minute insects), was proposed by Haiiday, and 
adopted by Westwood. I recognise it as a distinct order, in deference 
to the opinion of so eminent an entomologist as the proposer of the 
title, and the principal investigator of the group. 

I must now conclude. The subject is so vast that it is not an easy 
matter to compress it into the limits of a paper without running the 
risk of being misunderstood. I have repeated very little of the paper 
published in the Zoologist in its original form. It has been my aim to 
avoid as much as possible the introduction of anything new in principle 
and in nomenclature. My sole object is to aid, if I can, in bringing 
the classification of insects into a more systematic form than it is at 
present. I have carried out the details, in the arrangement of my own 
collection, chiefly in the orders Hymenoptera, Diptera and Hemiptera ; 
but these details will require a thorough revision, and this cannot be 
done properly without assistance. 

Southport, Sept., 1882. 



CONTRIBUTION TO A LIST OF THE HOMOPTERA OF 
LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE. 

[the north of LANCASTER EXCEPTED.] 

By Benjamin Cooke. 



CIXIID^. 

Cixius cunicularius, F. Manchester, Hazelgrove, Marple. 

C. nervosus, L. Manchester. 

C. brachycranus, Scott. Marple, August, 1865. 

C. pilosus, Oliv. Bollin Yalley, near Bowdon. 

C. stigmaticus^ Germ. The Brushes," near Stalybridge, June, 1863 

DELPHAOID^. 
Liburnia pellucida, F. Manchester, Rivington, Bowdon. 
L. discolor. Boh. Hazelgrove, Marple. 
L. neglecta, Flor. Manchester. 

APHROPHORIDJE. 
Aphrophora alni, Fall. Hazelgrove. 
Philaenus spumarius, L. Abundant, 
P. lineatus, L. Bollin Yalley. 

MEMBRACIDJE. 
Centrotus cornutus, L. Warrington. 

ACOCEPHALID^. 

Strongylocephalus agrestis, Fall. Manchester, Southport, Bowdon, 
Marple. 



72 



The N/Vturalist. 



Acocephalus nisticus, F. Manchester, Southport, Bowdon, Hazelgrove. 

A. bifasciatus, L. Rivington, Stalybridge. 

A. albifrons, L. Southport, Hazelgrove. 

A. flavostriatus, Don. Southport, Hazelgrove. 

BYTHOSCOPID^. 
Macropsis lanio, L. Bowdon, Hazelgrove, Pettypool, Delamere. 
Idiocerus adustus, Schaff. Manchester, Lytham. 
I. populi, L. Manchester, Rivington, Southport. 

Bythoscopus flavicollis, L. Manchester, Rivington, Greenfield, Hazelgrove 

Pediopsis cereus. Germ. Southport. 

P. nassatus. Germ. Manchester, Bowdon. 

Agallia puncticeps, Germ. Hazelgrove. 

TETTIGONID^. 

Euacanthus interruptus, L. Manchester, Bowdon, Hazelgrove. 

TYPHLOCYBID^. 
Alebra albostriella. Fall. Hazelgrove. 

Cybus smaragdulus, Fall. Manchester, Southport, Hazelgrove. 

Chlorita viridula, Fall. Bowdon. 

C. fliavescens, F. Manchester, Bowdon. 

Dicranoneura variata, Hardy. Southport. 

Typhlocyba decempunctata, Fall. Petty pool. 

T. quercus, F. Bowdon. 

T. ulmi, L. Abundant. 

T. geometrica, Schr. Manchester, Southport. 

T. rosse, L. Manchester, Bowdon, Hazelgrove. 

T. blandula, Rossi. Dowdon, Hazelgrove. 

Eupteryx tenellus. Fall. Bowdon, October, 18T8. 

E. urticjB, F. Manchester, Bowdon. 

E. pictus, F. Manchester, Bowdon, Hazelgrove. 

E. stachydearum. Hardy. Manchester, Aughton, Bowdon, 

E. pulchellus, Fall. Manchester, Rivington. Hazelgrove. 

JASSID^. 

Cicadula sexnotata, Fall. Manchester, Bowdon. 
Thamnotettis torneeila, Tett. Manchester, Hazelgrove, 
T. quadrinotata, F. Bowdon, Hazelgrove. 
Athysanus subfusculus. Fall. Manchester, Bowden. 
A. prasinns. Fall. Manchester, Bowdon, Hazelgrove. 
Allygus mixtus, F. Manchester, Southport, Hazelgrove. 

DELTOCEPHALID^. 
Delfcocephalus abdominalis, F. Manchester. 
D. sabulicola, Curt. Southport. 
D. striatus, L. Bowdon, Hazelgrove. 
D. socialis, Flor. Rivington, PettypooL 
D. ocellaris. Fall. Bowdon. 
D. pulicaris. Fall. Bowdon. 



Eainfall fok October. 



73 



PSYLLID^. 

Psylla Forsteri, Flor. Manchester, Southport, Hazelgrove. 

P. alni, L. Manchester, Hazelgrove. 

P. salicicola, Forst. Bowdon. 

P. fumipennis, Forst. Bowdon. 

P. cratsegicola, Forst., Manchester. 

P. mali, Forst. Bowdon. 

P. fraxinicola, Forst. Manchester, Rivington, Southport. 
Trioza urticse, L. Bowdon, Hazelgrove. 



IvatntEll far ©rtober. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 

of 

iieaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1882. 


1881. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Kobson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

3-69 


23 


28-37 


^ 27-19 


24 


0-70 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


4-50 


19 


40-44 


37-40 






Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


3-640 


30 


.23-080 


t20-615 


19 


0-785 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


4-040 


24 


28-660 


J27-170 


24 


0-710 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


4-77 


24 


26-78 


21-56 


24 


1-15 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


4-94 


27 


35-91 


34-61 


24 


1-00 


Went WORTH Castle (do.)... 


520 


4-41 


21 


27-81 


25-83 


24 


118 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


4-21 


25 


26-77 


21-27 


24 


1-50 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


5-64 


26 


18-292 


25-36 


24 


1-72 



* Average to date for 16 years, 1866-81. f Average of 28 years, 1853-62 k 1865-82. 
Z Average of 13 years, 1870-82. 



Badger, Otter, and Polecat. — Can any zoologist give particulars, 
^ through the columns of the Naturalist y of the occurrence in Yorkshire of 
the three above-named animals for the last ten or twelve years 1 As these 
interesting quadrupeds are now rare, I have no doubt many naturalists 
would be glad to see a comprehensive account of recent occurrences. — 
Geo. Roberts, Lofthouse, Wakefield, Oct. 31st. 

The Golden-eye Duck and White Sparrow at Elland. — On the 5th 
Nov., two males and one female of the above duck, in nearly mature 
plumage, were shot on the garden pond, Marshall Hall, the residence of 
Mr. John Smithies. A few weeks ago a beautiful white sparrow was 
shot at Elland Hall. Evolution has no chance here ; as soon as a variety 
appears, it is either shot or captured. — C. C. Hanson, Greetland. 

Fieldfares near Huddersfield. — From a report at page 56 of last 
month's Naturalist^ I perceive that fieldfares were observed near Hud- 



74 



The Naturalist. 



dersfield on Sept. 24th. Can any other correspondent corroborate this 
observation ? It is difficult to distinguish immigrant missel-thrushes 
from fieldfares when at a distance, especially if the respective notes of 
the birds are not heard. My earliest date for the appearance of the field- 
fare for the last twelve years is Oct. 12th. — Geo. Roberts. 

Snow-Bunting. — Last winter I bought a snow-bunting of a bird-catcher 
for the purpose of making myself acquainted with its song and notes, and 
also for the purpose of noticing any changes of plumage. The bird had 
been caught some time during the previous winter near Leeds, and 
having been confined in a small cage, its tail was worn to a stump. Its 
plumage was a uniform rufous-brown and black above, and a dirty white 
beneath. I gave it a pretty large cage, and fed it with canary seed. 
About the middle of March last it began to sing. Its song is weak for the 
size of the bird ; its notes, however, are mellow and full, and one peculiar 
note, generally uttered at night, is very loud and piercing. It sang only 
for a short time in spring, and always ceased singing if it saw anyone 
watching. For the first eight or nine months it kept continually jumping 
and dancing within the wires at the front of the cage, and at night never 
perched, but sat in a corner. About September it seemed to acquire a 
new dress without throwing ofi" any of the old. It has now a full 
plumage, tail included, has lost its habit of dancing, and has begun to 
perch both in the daytime, and at night when roosting. The new plumage 
is similar to the old, except in being brighter, in having a red-brown 
crescent on the breast, and a few white feathers on the crown and round 
the eyes, and more conspicuous white feathers in the tail. Mudie says 
that the snow-bunting in a wild state never perches. I presume that the 
reason it did not perch at first was that it had been confined in a 
small cage without perches, and that it was without tail, consequently 
unable, or less able, to balance itself on a perch. The feet of this species 
are not grasping feet, but more fit for standing or running on the leaves 
of aquatic plants, like the feet of the skylark, which bird, judging from 
the prolongation of the toes, has doubtless originally been a marsh-bird. 
The claw on the heel of my caged bunting was (before being shortened) 
nearly three-quarters of an inch in length. The bill is yellow, tipped 
with black. — Geo. Egberts. 

ENTOMOLOGICAL NOTES.— Through the kindness of Lord Wal- 
singham, I have recently added to my collection a pair of Steganoptycha 
rnfimitrana. His lordship bred a series, in June last, from larvae found 
in Norfolk, on fir {Abies ceplialonica) ; previously the species was only 
known, as British, by two Cambridge specimens, and one bred by Lord 
' Walsingham last year. Other additions to my cabinet include Platijpteryx 
sicula, from Bristol ; a pair of Dianthcecia Barrettii, taken by the late 
Mr. R. W. Sinclair, at Howth ; Gymnancijda canella, bred from pupae 
sent me last year by the Rev. E. N. Bloomfield, of Guestling, near 
Hastings, to whom I am also indebted for a batch of lain^ae, now feeding 



Short Notes and Queries. 



75 



on Salsola Kali ; Bactra fnrfiirayia, taken this season near Dublin, by 
the Rev. G. C . B. Madden, of Armitage Bridge ; several Cedestis gyssel- 
inel/a, taken this season at Dollar, N.B. ; Pterophorus Bertrami, taken in 
Carmarthenshire, and P. punctidactylus, in Cardiganshire, both by Mr. 
Nelson M. Richardson. — Geo. T. Porritt, September, 1882. 

BiNGLEY. — I quite confirm Mr. Carter's remarks about the past season 
being a bad one generally for macro-lepidoptera. The comparative 
scarcity of N . mnndana and P. pilosaria was very noticeable. A. meny- 
anthidis, N. Dahlii, H. glauca, C. ferrngata, and A. fumata are the only 
insects, as far as I remember, that occurred in their normal numbers. 
D. templi, A. inoryiata, and an Eupitliecia, perhaps /m^cmc/^a, one of each, 
are the only additions for this locality. S. cratcegalis was plentiful on 
Blackhills, and not uncommon on the southern slopes of Harden Moor. 
My brother was so fortunate as to secure Tinea fulvimitrella in Hawks- 
worth Wood in June, thus adding another to the few already known 
British localities.— E. P. P. Butterfield, Wilsden, Bingley, Nov. 9th.— 
[Other Yorkshire localities for Tinea fulvimitrella are Bramham, Don- 
caster, Potherham, Scarborough, and Sheffield.— G. T. P.] 

Cychrus rostratus at Grassington and Gilstead. — T took a single 
specimen of this beetle at Grassington, on the 6th of last August. I 
pulled up a small patch of Sedum acre to bring home, and out rolled the 
beetle. I have also a specimen from Gilstead, in Airedale, taken by Mr. 
Firth, last spring, from under a stone. — J. W. Carter, Bradford, 
Nov. 16th. 

Cychrus rostratus at Huddersfield. — It may interest Mr. Roebuck to 
know that last winter I took two specimens of this beetle in this district. 
They were hybernating under stones. — S. L. Mosley, Huddersfield, 
Nov. 15th. 

Sirex gigas at Huddersfield . — This autumn I had another Sirex gigas 
brought to me from Almondbury, by the same person and from the same 
place as the one last year.— G. C. B Madden, Armitage Bridge Vicar- 
age, Huddersfield, October. 

Sphagnum Austini, Sull., in S.W. Scotland. — Mr. Jas. McAndrew 
has a note in the Scottish Naturalist , No. xlviii, p. 378, that he has found 
this moss and its var. imhricatum (of both of which he has kindly sent us 
specimens), in large hassocks, on Moss Raplock, on the farm of Clatter- 
ingshaws — the scene of one of Robert Bruce's victories. He also finds it, 
but not in plenty, in Barend Moss, Laurieston, near Castle Douglas, and 
in Auchencairn Moss, near Auchencairn. These are all in Kirkcudbright- 
shire, and are new to prov. 13 of Watson. Its distribution is now, 
therefore, 12, 13, 18 a.— C. P. H, 

The Effects of Weather on Insects : By Miss Ormerod (Concluded), 
— The efi'ect of weather as a means of destroying insect eggs, was next 
touched on, and it was laid down that the weather influence that seems 



76 



The Natuealist. 



to be mainly depended upon as an agent for this purpose is desiccation^ — 
that is, drying the egg by throwing it out from its natural locality to such 
influences of air and sunshine as may dry up the contained fluid, and 
thus prevent the embryo within from developing. It is possible to 
prevent attack by turning the eggs down to an ascertained depth, at 
which, although the tenant may hatch out, yet if the ground is in a 
natural state the insect cannot penetrate it. If the earth is cracked, of 
course the deep crevices admit air, and alter the state of the case, but it 
is plain that we can destroy great numbers of eggs by throwing them out, 
upwards or downwards, from their natural place of deposit, and also we 
may diminish the quantity of eggs laid above ground by decreasing the 
number of places proper for egg-laying. Clearing away neglected weeds 
will demolish many nurseries of coming attack, good liming will keep the 
click beetle from laying eggs to infest the meadow with wireworm, or a 
better plan is penning sheep on grass that it is particularly desirable to 
protect, thus not only preventing oviposition, but destroying the young 
grubs just beneath the ground from its being sodden with matter injurious 
to insect life. The use of chemical manure, such as super-phosphate, has 
been found to decrease the ravages of the cabbage-root maggot ; while, 
as the onion-flies lay their eggs very frequently either just below the 
surface of the ground, or if possible at the base of the bulb, it has been 
found that if onion bulbs are earthed up from time to time the flies are 
thus obliged to lay their eggs at haphazard, on the leaves or ground, or at 
least not in such a position that the maggots, if they hatch at all, can 
make their way to their food, and this prevents very much of the attack, 
and agrees well with the plant-growth. Passing to deal with larvae, the 
lecturer pointed out that in this country the conditions which are most 
favourable for the hatching of the larvse of the greater part of our insects 
are moderate warmth, together with some degree of moisture, while heavy 
rain, and especially rain following a term of warm dry weather, is most 
destructive to larvae exposed to it, as well by its immediate efi"ect upon 
them as presenting them food caused thei'eby to be unsuitable to larval 
life. The turnip fly, or beet fly, or whichever it may be, was very 
injurious till the rain washed it off", or started the plant, or in some way 
put an end to its rav^ages ; and it was pointed out that when we look at 
the injury caused by overplus of rain in some years and deficiency in 
others, and the benefits that might possibly be derived from a more 
extended plan of field cisterns, it is so plain that a better regulated 
distribution of water, both as an external application to clear ofi" insect 
vermin and for absorption by the roots to press on the growth, would be 
thoroughly useful, that the point of how far it could be managed by steam 
power at a paying rate is well worth thinking of. Miss Ormerod con- 
cluded : The coolness and darkness of the night, or the bright sunshine, 
as distinguished from the cloudy light of many of our summer days, all 
have their effect on insect life, some of which we can utilise, and some of 
which, although we cannot alter them, will benefit us, if we notice them. 



Short Notes and Queries. 



77 



by preparing us for coming attack. The common cockchafer h quiet 
under the leafage in the heat of the day, and may then be shaken down 
and destroyed ; and, though we do not often suffer from injury caused 
by the grub of this beetle to the amount to which it ravages in Germany, 
yet the extent to which it has destroyed young pine plantations near 
Salisbury in the last two years shows that we need to keep it in check, 
lest it should rise to be as severe a i^est as the grubs of 'various kinds of 
chafers are now proving in the Southern Island of New Zealand. The 
daddy-longlegs grubs come out at night to feed, or travel on the surface, 
and are then open to rolling or other measures of destruction ; some of 
our turnip and cabbage caterpillars are similarly open to attack at night, 
or in the dusk hours, and the great caterpillars of the death's-head moth, 
which sometimes do great harm to the leafage of the potato, are variable 
in their time of feeding, so that it is desirable for someone interested in 
the matter to ascertain the habits of the special caterpillars before setting 
destructive operations on foot. The click beetle, the parent of the wire- 
worm, may be swept up in great numbers in the evening from grass ; 
and, on the other hand, the turnip flea-beetle rejoices in the sunshine, 
and then flies far and spreads rapidly. It is points such as these that we 
need to know more of ; it is the province of the entomologist to give the 
name of the insect, and to know the precise history of its method and 
place of existence ; but it is the province of the agriculturalist to notice, 
in real practical and continuous observation, the various influences which 
act upon it, and, may I not add, when observed to make them known. 
It is a matter of great importance — it is nothing less than the daily bread 
of the nation, which, for want of attention, is being in many cases abso- 
lutely thrown to the insect-vermin, whilst the landholder is distressed for 
want of the crops which need not have been lost. 



NOTICES OF BOOKS.—" Children's I'lowers : the Friends of their 
Rambles and their Play." London : Religious Tract Society, 1882. — We 
have received a copy of the above from the author, and though we are 
not quite sure that in some respects it comes v/ithin our scope, yet we 
cannot refrain from giving it a word or two of praise. It professes to be 
a book written for children, and for the purpose of interesting them, and 
giving them instruction about our common way&ide flowers ; and for this 
purpose all must concede that it is an eminent success. We know 
children who can barely read, but who can understand what is read to 
them in simple language, who are quite captivated with it — who will 
gather all the flowers they meet with in their rambles through the fields, 
and eagerly demand of nurse or teacher to read to them what this book 
says about them. Each flower and plant is described in simple, untech- 
nichal language, that any child can understand, shows how, by dissecting 
them, they can compare the various components of the flowers and leaves 
of each plant with others, thus imparting both interest and instruction, 
and no doubt will sow the seeds of future and further enquiry into these 



78 



The Naturalist. 



beauties of nature." A short moral lesson is also attached to each 
flower or plant, which, without being in any way partisan in character, 
may be studied with profit even by children of larger growth. We 
heartily commend the book to all who have young families, as a most 
useful and interesting birthday or christmas present, and one which will 
be thoroughly appreciated by any child of from 5 to 10 years of age, and 
possessed of ordinary intelligence. We should have been glad had the 
authoress — who is a native of our own town — been pleased to affix her 
name to the book ; but as she has not, although she is well known to us, 
we must preserve her incognito. 



iUpods of Soctcfos* 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Nov. 7th, Dr. Lancaster 
in the chair. — A paper of great interest to our coal district was given by 
Mr. H. B. Nash, entitled How the Coal Measures were formed." 
Observations of birds during the last few weeks : September 15th, 
willow warbler and chifiichaff in song, last recorded ; Oct. 1, a great 
spotted woodpecker visited a garden at top of Church-street. It occurred 
on several days : not noted before in the town. It has again been 
recorded in the neighbouring parks and woods. Oct. 4th, a night-jar ; 
5th, redwings and fieldfares observed ; 17th, a swallow noted ; 23rd, 
latest notice of house martins ; 29th, Hay's wagtail (a late stay) and the 
grey wagtail, a partial migrant from north-west Yorkshire in winter to 
our va^lley streams and warm milJ-ponds ; 25th, sandpipers and water- 
rails by the Calder — the latter seldom seen with us ; woodcocks first 
noted ; 28th, yellow-hammer, hedge accentors, wrens, larks in song, the 
latter heard up to the present time (Nov. 18th) ; 29th, kestrel, gold- 
crest, grey wagtails, moorhens noted by Mr. J. Parkins between Wake- 
field and Barnsley ; 30th, a barn owl set up from a field by Mr. J. 
Dymond, of Burntwood, and chased by four rooks and other birds ; a 
pied blackbird noted several days in Locke Park, Barnsley : a skua gull, 
examined by Mr. G. Parkin and pronounced a young Richardson's skua, 
shot at Cudworth (not noted previously in our district) ; Nov. I7th, 
kestrel seen at Belk Farm, Worsborough ; 18th, one seen by me near 
Dodworth. Both were hovering over fields and copses, and were often 
seen further away from the town, and occasionally the sparrow-hawk. — 
Thos. Lister. 

Bradeord Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Oct. 17th, the president 
in the chair. — The evening was devoted to the exhibition of microscopic 
objects. Messrs. Fawcett and Kershaw showed a large number of 
objects, including sheep-tic, parasite from pig, larva of 0. anfiqna, 
section of meteorite showing fluid cavitj^, &c. ; Mr. Oxley, stained 
sections of stems ; and Mr. West, Draparnaldia plumosa, &c., from 



Reports of Societie'8. 



79 



Clayton. Mr. Soppitt gave an account of the recent meeting of the 
Y.N.U. at Thirsk, and stated that he had collected about 90 species of 
fungi. He exhibited specimens of Phragmidinm violaceam and rubi, 
collected at that meeting — two species hitherto in this country confounded 
as P. bulbosiim, and pointed oat the characteristics of each. He also 
showed Tetr aphis pellucida, in fruit, collected on the same occasion. Mr. 
llling worth showed C. Edusa, A . Galafhea, S. ^geria, &c. 

Meeting Oct. 31st, the president in the chair. — The recorders of the 
botanical section (Messrs. Soppitt and West) reported on the work done 
by that section during the year 1882. They stated that the number of 
plants added to the list during the year was 110, viz : — phanerogams 11, 
fungi 55, mosses 16, hepatics 6, lichens 12, and algse 10, making a total 
of 1,444 species actually observed by members of the society in the 
districts under investigation. Mr. Soppitt exhibited and described a 
number of micro-fungi. 

Meeting Nov. ]4th, the president in the chair. — Mr. Firth reported 
on the work done by the vertebrate-zoological section during the year. 
He stated that the additions to the list were few in number, and consisted 
of the whiskered bat ( Vespertilio mystacinus) from Ben-Rhydding, little 
bittern (Ardetta minuta) from Frizinghall, the great-crested newt {Triton 
cristatus) from Baildon, and the common snake {Tropidonottis natrix) 
from Wilsden, making a total of ] 64 species recorded for the district, viz. 
mammalia 20 species, birds 13G, reptiles 4, and amphibians 4. For the 
conchological section Mr. Soppitt gave an elaborate report and list of 
species of land and fresh- water mollusca, in which he enumerated 101 
species and varieties, amongst which were Sphcerinm rivicola, Shipley and 
Seven Arches ; Anodonta cygnea, Bradford Moor and Saltaire : Neritina 
fluviatilis from Shipley, Bingley, &c. ; Fupa ringens from Shipley Glen. 
Mr. West showed Nitella mncronata from a pond near Bedford — the 
second British station. — J. W. C. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Monthly 
meeting, Oct. 30th, the president (Mr. S. X Capper) in the chair. — Mr. 
C. H. H. Walker read a paper entitled ^' The Entomology of the Antedi- 
luvian World," which he illustrated by coloured diagrams of its fauna 
and flora. He referred to the necessity of the study of paleontological 
entomology for a proper idea of the classiQcatien of recent insects ; and 
with reference to discussions which have taken place at recent meetings 
of the society on the subject of connecting links between different orders 
of insects, he instanced the presence of insect remains (forming a group 
known as the PaliBodictyoptera) in the carboniferous and permian series 
of strata, which are generally considered to be intermediate in structure 
between the Orthoptera and Neuroptera. To illustrate the paper, Mr. 
J. T. Moore sent specimens of fossil insects from the Ravenhead (St. 
Helen's) collection in the museum, and Mr. Walker exhibited a slab of 
slate containing fossil dragon-flies. Mr. Frazer, of Crosby^ exhibited a 



80 



The Naturalist. 



hermaphrodite specimen of the fox moth, Bomhyx ruhi. — J. W. Ellis, 
Hon. Sec. 

Port Elizabeth Naturalists' Society.— The meeting of this society, 
on October 19th, was one of imusual importance, the subject of discus- 
sion — viz., Injurious Insects " — being of vital interest to agriculturalists 
and commercial men. Mr. Russell Hallack, president, occupied the 
chair. Mr. S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S., introduced the question, briefly 
aJluding to the ravages of insect pests. Scientific research has failed 
hitherto in elucidaling the causes which operate in producing the vast 
swarms of destrucfcive insects at certain periods. Gregarious locusts, 
living peaceably together, by some curious and inexplicable communica- 
tion of purpose, suddenly take wing and fly towards distant parts in 
countless myriads. BuUerflie"., beetles, flies. &c., of great rarity one 
season, appear in swarms daring the succeeding. How may these facts 
be explained i By scientiiic and practical observation. The first is 
desirable, the latter essenlial. Thus, farmers and horticulturahsts who 
are constantly working amongst their crops, are the proper persons to 
discover cause by record iug eifect. Much difliculty is encountered in 
this country through the utter absence of popular books or magazines. 
We have no gardener's chronicle, agriculturalist's guide, no text-books or 
useful monthlies, and few, if any, of our press publications devote columns 
to the furtherance of Natural History observations. The naturalists 
petition outside aid." They require notes and specimens, and will 
undertake for their part to accumulate observations and suggested 
remedies, forwarding all correspondence to a proper centre for purposes 
of determination. A most valuable and interesting letter was read by 
the secretary from Miss E. A. Ormerod, F.M S., the w^ell-known farmer's 
friend, and several pamphlets were distributed amongst the members. 
Mr. Bairstow also exhibited a pen-and-ink sketch illustrating the life- 
history of our common fig-moth, with comments thereon, as an example 
of peisonal observation. — [Communicated by S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S., 
late of Huddersfield.] 

RiPON Naturalists' Club. — A very pleasant evening, under Mr. E. A. 
Ebd ell's presidency, was spent, and a number of exhibits were handed 
round for inspection, including — Mr. Lickley, j)rehistoric chisel of rein- 
deer horn, found 1878 in Stammergate, 14 feet below the surface, three 
antique keys found near the Minster, blade of old dagger found near 
Quarry Moor, three coins and fossil from Whitby lias ; Mr. T. Pratt, 
M.R.C.Y.S., Eozoon canadense from Laurentian limestone, Montrose; 
Mr. D. W. Moss, several fossils from magnesian limestone of Wormald 
Green ; Mr. G. Malthouse, cowslips, primroses, and violets in flower. 
Mr. J. Waite reported capture of the following moths this month : — 
P. 2?opidi, E. tiliaria, H. iiennaria, H. aurcmtiaria, Id. defoliariaj 0. 
filigrammaria, G. flavago, H. micacea, N. C-nigrum, &c. The swallow 
was seen the third week in October, and the house martin the fourth 
week, at Borrage. 



CONCHOLOGICAL FIELD NOTES FROM 
WENSLEYDALE. 



By William Denison Roebuck. 

In continuation of the holiday notes contained in my paper on the 
conchology of Semerdale, I now give a list of the mollusca, which ^ 
during the same fortnight of August (1882), were collected by 
myself and friends in various parts of the main dale of Wensley. 

The localities visited by us were principally about Askrigg, 
Aysgarth, Bolton, Wensley, Redmire, Middleham, and Jerveaulx, 
Bainbridge being the point of departure for all our excursions. Near 
Askrigg, our principal collecting grounds, which we visited several 
times, were those picturesquely wooded portions of the valley of the 
Sargill Beck (an affluent of the Yore, which joins it opposite the 
debouchure of the river Bain), known as Whitfield and Mill Gills, the 
former being situated about a mile further up the valley than the 
latter. These two Gills we found very productive of mollusca, both 
as regards species and individuals ; their geological structure is 
favourable, and they present great diversity of surface, soil, and con- 
ditions. On other occasions we collected about Aysgarth Force and 
Bridge, and on both banks of the Yore at these places. We walked 
from Bainbridge to Aysgarth, collecting as vre went, our road leading 
along what is called the ^ Scar Top,' — which is the lowest of the 
escarpments of Addleborough Hill — and then passing through 
Cubeck, Thornton Rust, and Low Gill, to Palmer Flatts and 
Aysgarth Bridge. Leaving Aysgarth, our line of route was to the 
north, through fields, and past the Castle Banks to Bolton Castle, 
the ancient home of the Scropes ; and on leaving the Castle we passed 
through the village of Castle Bolton to -Redmire Station. Having, 
on more than one occasion, upwards of an hour to wait here for our 
train, our time was well and profitably spent in the investigation of a 
piece of waste land, situate at the point where the railway crosses the 
Apedale Beck, and about a hundred yards or so from the station. 
Another of our collecting expeditions had for its starting-pointy 
Wensley Railway Station, from which we walked first south to the 
pretty and picturesque village, from which the whole dale derives its 
name (Wensley), and then to Middleham, taking the road which 
runs parallel with the river. Having duly inspected the Castle of 
Middleham (where we did not neglect to secure some molluscan 
souvenirs) we hired a conveyance and drove by way of East Witton 
N.S., Vol. viii., Jan., 1883, 



82 



The Na^turalist. 



to Jerveaulx Abbey. Here the time at disposal, after examination 
of the ground-plan of the varions buildings, did not permit of a 
search for shells, and we had to content ourselyes with dead speci- 
mens which we found in a horse-trough among the ruins. Here^ 
they were in tolerable numbers, both of species and indiyiduals^ 
giving some slight indication of what we might have expected to find 
living among the hoary ruins and well-kept gardens of the old 
Cistercian Monastery. The conveyance once more in requisition, we 
drove from Jerveaulx to Ley burn, and then walked along Leyburn 
Shawl and through Gillfair Wood to Scarth Nick, and down the 
Eichmond Koad to Eedmire Station. Our other excursions^ — 
exclusive of those devoted to the examination of Semerdale — were 
pedestrian feats and mountaineering exploits, in the course of which 
we did not make conchological investigations, beyond duly noting 
such species as might casually and aceidently obtmsde themselves 
upon our notice. 

The observations on the weather, &c., made in the paper on 
Semerdale, apply in equal degree to the present one, and I will only 
add that as no rain whatever fell for nearly a fortnight, shells were 
day by day increasingly more difficult to detect. To put the case 
more pointedly, I will instance one or two visits to the waste ground 
near Redmire Station. One was immediately after our first arrival 
in the dale, and the other about a week later. Heavy rains had 
preceded the commencement of our holiday, falling, in fact, up to the 
Yery day before we started. So on our first visit to Redmire the 
waste land yielded abundantly. Then followed s week of brigM, 
sunny, and dry weather, and our second visit was productive only of 
straggling individuals of Helix rotimdata. 

Messrs. Nelson and Taylor have done me the kindness to examine 
my shells, and give me the benefit of their opinions on the determin- 
ation of the more critical ones ; and I am much indebted to my friend, 
Mr. T. K. Skipwith, for co-operation and companionship during the 
collection of them ; also to my other companions for the good-natured 
forbearance and cheerful resignation with which they endured the 
affliction of the company of a couple of snail grubbers/' — as they 
feelingly styled us. 

To render the present paper a complete record of what we, so far, 
know of the conchology of the upper portion of Wcnsleydale (from 
Jerveaulx upwards), I include in the list notes of the species and 
varieties which were collected in the dale, in 1877, by Messrs. Wm, 
Nelson and John W. Taylor, and Mr. Henry Crowther \ at Hardraw 



EOEBUCK : CONCHOLOGICAL NOTES, WeNSLEYDALB. 83 



Scar, in 1879, by Mr. Eobert Scharff; and at Aysgarth, in 1882, by 
Mr. J. A. Douglas ; these observations (communicated to the Con- 
chological Society) not having been before published. Their records 
are distinguished from my own by being enclosed in square brackets. 

\_SpJi(jermm corneum, L. Was found in 1877, at Birk Rigg, three 
miles from Hawes — H. Crowther.] 

Bythinia tentaculata, L. One dead specimen found in the horse- 
trough at Jerveaulx Abbey. 

\_Planorbis carinatus, Miill. Birk Rigg, 1877 — H. Crowther.] 

\^Physa Jiypnorum, L. Birk Riggj 1877 — H. Crowther.] 

Limncea peregra, Miill Common in a water-trough at Aysgarth 
Bridge ; dead specimens were found in the horse-trough at Jerveaulx 
Abbey. [Birk Rigg, 1877— H. Crowther.] 

L. truncatula^ Miill. Very numerous in a shallow pool on a rock- 
shelf, ten feet above tlie level, of the stream below Mill Gill Force. 
[Birk Rigg and Snaizeholme, 1877 — H. Crowther.] 

[A. glabra, Miill. Birk Rigg, 1877— H. Crowther.] 

Ancylm fliwiat'dis^ Miill. Very common with Limnaa peregra in the 
water-trough by the roadside at Aysgarth Bridge, and not uncommon 
in the Yore, above and below Aysgarth. [Near Ulshaw Bridge, 
1877— W. Nelson.] 

Avion atf^r, L. The Black Slug. Common in Whitfield Gill ; 
noted also on the grassy slopes below Nappa Scar, Castle Bolton, and 
at Low Gill, near Aysgarth. 

A. hortensis^ Fer. Noticed at Castle Bolton and in Gillfair Wood. 

Limax agrestis, L. The Field Slug. Abundant on the waste ground 
near Redmire Station, and at Middleham Castle; at Whitfield and 
Mill Gills, and along the Scar Top, Bainbridge. 

L. arhorum^ Bonch-chant. Two specimens found crawling on the 
eastern outer wall of Bolton Castle. [East Witton, 1877 — W. 
Nelson.] 

L, maximiis, L. The Great Slug. One specimen seen at Whitfield 
Gill. 

Succinea putris, L. The Amber Snail. Abundant on stems and 
leaves of butterbur, in damp situations in the remotest recesses of 
Mill Gill. [Birk Rigg,. 1877— H. Crowther.] 

Vihina pellucida, Miill. The Glass Snail. A few immature 
specimens noted on Lcyburn Shawl, and on the top of the Scar at 
Scarth Nick. 



'3 



84 



The Natuealist. 



Zonites cellarius^ Miill. The Cellar Snail. Common at Whitfield 
Gill ; specimens also taken on Leyburn Shawl, at Aysgarth Force, 
and one in the ground floor of Bolton Castle. 

Z. alliarius, Miller. The Garlic Snail. Common in Whitfield 
Gill; found also on Leyburn Shawl^ at Leas House, near Askrigg, 
and near the summit of one of the towers of Bolton Castle. [Car- 
perby, 1877— H. Crowther.] 

Z. glaher^ Stud. One specimen in the village of Castle Bolton. 

Z, nitidulm^ Drap. A few specimens at Mill Gill, in the court-yard 
of Middleham Castle, and at Leas House, near Askrigg. 

Z, crystallinusj Miill. Common amongst decayed leaves at Whit- 
field Gill. 

Z, fulms, Miill. A few specimens found in moss and amongst 
decaying leaves at Whitfield Gill. 

Helix aculeata, Miill. One specimen found by Mr. Skipwith on 
decayed leaves at Whitfield Gill. 

[ff. aspersa^ Miill. One, an immature example, found at Jerveaulx 
Abbey in 1877— J. W. Taylor.] 

H. nemoralis^ L. One on the waste ground near the Redmire 
station ; while on the summit of Nappa Scars, at an altitude of about 
1600 feet, I found it very abundant in the interstices between the 
rocks. These latter specimens were all very fine and large, one of 
them being the largest I have ever seen. 

[Aysgarth, 1872 — J. A. Douglas.] 

H. nemoralisj var. Brlssonia, Moquin-Tandon. The specimen from 
Eedmire mentioned above pertained to this colour-variation, being a 
five-banded example on a light-brown or reddish flesh ground colour. 

IT. nemoralis var. libdluda^ Risso. All the Nappa specimens were of 
this, the yellow bandless variety. 

H. Jiof'tensis, Miill. All the specimens we obtained were either 
immature or dead. They occurred singly, near Wensley, on Leyburn 
Shawl, on the top of the Scar at Scarth Nick, at Aysgarth Force, 
and in an old limekiln at Aysgarth Bridge. [Jerveaulx Abbey, 1877 
—J. W. Taylor.] 

H, hortensu var. quinquemttata^ Moq. Tand. All my specimens 
(mentioned under R. hortensis) were of this, which is the typical form 
of the species, with five distinct black bands on a yellow ground. 

B. arbustorum^ L. Was very abundant on the rank vegetation in 
Whitfield and Mill Gills, and also occurred at Castle Banks and 
Castle Bolton. [Birk Rigg and Worton, 1877 — H. Crowther; 
Hardraw Scar, 1879— R. Scharff; and Aysgarth, 1882— J. a 
Douglas.] 



KoEBucK : CoNCHOLOGicAL NoTEs, Wensleydale. 85 



arhnstoriim var. flavescens, Moq. Tand. Worton, 1877 — H. 
Crowther.] 

arbustorumYSiV, alpestris, Ziegl. Worton, 1877 — H. Crowther.] 
H, rufeseens, Penn. Abundant in Whitfield and Mill Gills, at 
Castle Bolton, Aysgarth Force, near Wensley, and on the waste 
ground at Redmire ; occurred also on the top of the Scarth Nick, and 
in the ground floor chambers of Bolton Castle ; and dead specimens 
in the horse-trough at Jerveaulx x\bbey. [Birk Rigg, and Askrigg, 
1877— H. Crowther; East Witton, 1877— W. Nelson ; and Hard- 
raw Scar, 1879 — R. Scharff.] 

Helix kispida^ L. Abundant at Mill Gill , Thornton Rust, Leyburn 
8hawl, Leas House, Aysgarth Force, and Aysgarth Bridge; occurred 
also at Worton Pasture, near Bainbridge, and near the summit of one 
of the towers of Bolton Castle; and dead ones in the trough at 
Jerveaulx. [Birk Rigg, 1877— H. Crowther.] 

H, sericea, Drap. Occurred at Mill Gill and Whitfield Gill. [Birk 
Rigg, 1877— H Crowther ; and Hardraw Scar, 1879— R. Scharff.] 
[Z^. caperata^ Mont. Middleham, September, 1877— W. Nelson.] 
H. ericetorum, Miill. A few specimens at the old limekiln, near 
Aysgarth Bridge. [Middleham, 1877 — W. Nelson.] 

H. rotundata^ Miill. Was very common wherever we collected ; at 
Whitfield and Mill Gills, at Leas House, at Thornton Rust, near 
Wensley, at Middleham Castle, near Redmire Station, on Leyburn 
Shawl, at Castle Bolton, and in the ground floors of Bolton Castle. 

[Hardraw Scar, 1877 — W. Nelson; Jerveaulx Abbey, 1877 — 
J. W. Taylor ; and Aysgarth, 1882— J. A. Douglas.] 

R. rupestris, Stud. A montane or subalpine species, very abundant 
on all the limestone walls and. " scars," as at Cubeck, Thornton Rust, 
Low Gyll, near Aysgarth, Wensley, Leyburn Shawl, top of Scarth 
Nick, and Castle Banks, near Bolton. 

[Carperley, 1877— H. Crowther ; Cotter Force, 1877— W. Nelson ; 
Aysgarth, 1882— J. A. Douglas.] 

\H, pulchella, Miill., var. codata^ Miill. Aysgarth, 1877 — W. 
Nelson.] 

H, lapicida, L. Common on walls along the roadsides below Scarth 
Nick and at Castle Banks, near Bolton ; occurred also at the lime- 
kiln at Aysgarth Bridge, and a dead shell on the top scar at Scarth 
Nick. 

[Birk Rigg, 1877— H. Crowther; Jerveaulx xibbey, 1877— J. W. 
Taylor.] 



86 



The Naturalist. 



Bulimus ohsciirus^ Mi;ll. Common at Aysgarth Force ; a single 
specimen on the waste land near Bedmire Station. 
[Leyburn, 1877— H. Crowther.] 

Ptipa umhilicata^ Drap. Common on Leybnrn Shawl, at Middleham 
Castle, about Aysgarth Force, and at Leas House, near Askrigg ; 
occurred also amongst moss collected in Whitfield Gill. 

[Carperley, 1877— H. Crowther; Hardraw Scar 1877— W. Nelson.] 
Pnpa umMUcaiaj var. albina, Moquin-Tandon. Carperby, 1877 — ^ 
H. Crowther.] 

Balia perversa, L. In September, 1877, Messrs. Nelson and 
Taylor found this species occurring in great profusion under the top 
stones of walls throughout Wensleydale, the shells turning up under 
almost every stone examined. In August, 1882, we certainly did not 
find it so numerous, nor at all generally distributed ; but as the 
specimens we did get were those which the spiders had forcibly 
detained and probably killed, it may have been the dryness of the 
weather that prevented our finding living examples in as great 
9,bundance as my friends did five years ago. Mr. Skipwith and I 
found the spider-captured shells not uncommon on walls by the road-, 
sides, east of Wensley, at Castle Banks, near Bolton, and on the 
bounder-walls of Gillfair Wood, but nowhere else. 

[Carperby, 1877— H. Crowther • Cotter Force, 1877-^W. Nelson, 

Claiisilia rugom, Drap. Common about Wensley, at Aysgarth 
Force, at Whitfield and Mill Gills, on the waste land at Kedmire, 
and at Castle Banks, near Bolton ; we also found it at Gillfair 
Wood, Thornton Rust, Leyburn Shawl, and Jerveaulx Abbey. 

[Birk Rigg and Carperby, 1877— H. Crowther; East Witton, 
1877— W. Nelson.] 

C. dubia^ Drap. Besides those we found in Semerdale, we only 
found one specimen in Wensleydale ; this was by the road-side, east 
of Wensley. 

[Cotter Force, 1877— W. Nelson; Jerveaulx Abbey, 1877—. 
J. W. Taylor ; Fencote, Wensleydale— W.N.] 

C. laminata, Mont. Two specimens found at Aysgarth Force. 

CocJilicopa iridenSj Pult., var. Noidetiam^ Dup. Whitfield and 
Mill Gills, one example at each place. 

C. lubrica, Miill. Not unfrequent on Leyburn Shawl, at Castle 
Bolton, Aysgarth Force, Low Gill near Aysgarth, and at Redmire, 

[Hawes, 1877-'H. Crowther.] 

CarycJmm mhmiiim, Miill. Common amongst moss, and oi> 
decaying leaves in moist places at Whitfield Gill. 



MosLEY : Classification of British Lepidoptera. 87 



The list thus includes the names of 48 species and named varieties 
of mollusca, to which should be added, Anodonta anatina^ L., 
dmcylm flmlatiUs^ Miill., var. gibbosa^ Bourg., Zo7iites radiatidus. Aid,, 
and Vertigo ^ygm(2(jr., Drap., forms which were enumerated in my 
paper on Semerdale, as having occurred in that little valley, and 
which have not as yet been reported from other parts of Wensley- 
dale. These additions bring up the total of the Wensleydale 
moUuscan fauna, so far as is at present known, to 52 species and 
varieties, of which 10 only are a(iuatic forms, 

Leed^, Oct. 31, 1882. 



AN ATTEMPT TO CLASSIFY THE BRITISH LEPIDOPTERA, 

SO AS TO FORM A CONNECTION 
WITH THE TRICHOPTERA AT ONE END, AND THE 
HYMENOPTERA AT THE OTHER, 

By S, L Mosley, 

Mr. Benjamin Cooke says that one order of insects has nothing 
whatever to do with another order, and that each should be arranged 
independently of the other. I scarcely think that this is the view 
entertained by naturalists generally, and for myself, I have always 
thought that the most natural arrangement is that by which one 
unbroken continuity is obtained, one uninterrupted progression from 
species to species, genus to genus, family to family, and order to order. 
If one order or one genus has no connection with another, what is the 
use of quibbling over the " natural position " of such and such a genus 
— say Acentropus ] The progress from one order to another should 
be as imperceptible as possible, and each should, at both ends, 
merge gradually into the next-of-kin. 

I will, therefore, attempt to arrange the lepidoptera according to the 
above plan, though perhaps without much effect, for collectors are so 
accustomed to arrange their collection with Fapilio Machaon at the 
head, that any other plan would be discarded as unnatural — not being 
like their cabinet drawers. The type of any genus, family, or order, 
should not be at the head, but in the centre, and shade off above and 
below into the next division, as expressed in my last paper. 

In the first place, let us consider the two divisions I have placed 
next to the lepidoptera. 

Trichoptera. — These insects are, undoubtedly, very nearly allied to 
the lepidoptera, so near, indeed, that the late Ed. Newman, at one 



88 



The Naturalist. 



time, considered they formed part of the lepidoptera, and at present it 
is by no means clear that some genera like Acentropus and Psychcy 
which are placed in the lepidoptera, do not properly belong to the 
trichoptera. It is, therefore, very clear that this order, or sub-order, 
should be placed in close proximity to the lepidoptera. 

Hymenoptera, — Another family of insects which possesses several, 
perhaps I might say many, points of resemblance to the lepidoptera, is 
tenthredinid^e or saw-flies ; these, especially in their larva state, in 
their appearance, manner of feeding, formation of cocoons, &c., are so 
near to the lepidoptera as to to easily mistaken for them. These in- 
sects should also occupy a position close to the lepidoptera, and the 
only natural way seems to be to place the trichoptera at one end, and 
the tenthredinidse at the other, with the lepidoptera between, the 
former connecting them with the neuroptera, and the latter with the 
hymenoptera. 

The arrangement which I propose should be begun with the genus 
Acentropus^ as being the nearest allied to the trichoptera, if, indeed, it 
really be not one of that sub order. Then should follow the genus 
Hydrocamim^ and the rest of the Pyrales, followed by the Deltoides, 
Crambites, Tortricina, and Tineina. Then should come the Geometrina, 
beginning with the pugs." After the Geometrina the Noctuse, 
beginning with the Noctua-Geometriformes, and ending with the 
Noctua-bombyciformes, the reverse of which is at present employed. 

The step out of the Noctuss is through the genus Jcronyda into the 
Bombyces, in which I should place all, or nearly all, of those Nocturni 
now generally placed after M. arundinis^ the pseudo-bombyces, and 
perhaps one or two of those included under Noctuae. These I would 
arrange in a similar manner to that of our present lists, with the hairy 
larvse at the end, finishing up with the bristly S. carpini From this 
we go to the butterflies, beginning with those that have spiny larvse, 
the Nymphalidse, arranging them on a similar plan to that adopted in 
Newman's work on these insects. From the butterflies (skippers) we 
pass to the Sphingidse, beginning with the clear-wings (ibVsi'a), and thus 
merging into the first division of the next order. 

I throw out these few ideas, not that they will be likely to be 
adopted by many, but more with the view of causing others to expresa 
their opinions upon the plan proposed. It seems to me that each 
collector has devoted himself to one order, arranged that according to 
his own idea, without any reference to any other order. We want to 
study the relationships of the various groups more, and this cannot be 
done when collectors and students devote themselves to one group or 



Bairstow : Natural History Notes — South Africa. 89 



perhaps a section of a group ; and although this is very desirable for 
the thorough working of groups, yet, we want more general workers — 
more entomologists who go in for the " whole hog." 

Beaumont Park, 

Huddersfield. 



NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 

By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

When Fate decrees that friends must part, then Fortune steps in and 
provides the consolatory links of pen, ink, and paper. Since we do 
not possess, as yet, an Anglo-African phone through which we may 
transmit our thoughts, I am compelled to write them down, and 
reserve the speech for a future and happy occasion. Over six 
thousand miles of sea divide us, but my mind often travels back to 
scenes of yore, and I do not forget those happy rambles amongst hills 
and vales, heaths and forests, when friends, flushed in the excitement 
of search priority, drink to repletion from Nature's runnel, and sink 
all caste prejudices and social feuds with an earnestness matured by 
congenial fellowship, I yearn to feel the grip and honest wag of 
so-and-so's hand ; to hear " Halloo ! Bairstow, how are yon ^" escape 
from somebody's lips ; to sit 'twixt two notorious grubbers at a long 
table in a local Natural History pub." rehearsing the day's delightful 
captures, and discussing sliced ham or under-done beef. Ah ! we 
value what we lose, do we not? I have sufficient conceit, however, to 
believe there are a few old friends who will not regret hearing my 
silent voice " once more ; and though this letter, strictly speaking, 
cannot be included in the huge category of Yorkshire Field-Club 
exploits, you may be enabled to pick up a few fragments and pass 
them round your festive board. 

To prelude science, permit me to remark, " the name of Naturalist 
is a passport into antipodean regions." Thus I introduce myself to 
an old colonist. Dame Nature is broached. We are at home in a 
second. " Come and take supper with me," said the gentleman. We 
suppered, and have since continued the best of friends. This beats 
Freemasonry, and when two men fill their pipes from the same pouch, 
you may declare an amicable settlement. 

Verbosity avast ! What shall I write about % You know my 
weaknesses — lepidoptera and ichneumons ; and, if partiality directed, 
I might be induced to confine observations to one or both of these 



90 



The Naturalist. 



most interesting studies. But in so short a period — eighteen months 
— I really feel incapable of doing justice to the favorites, so I must 
endeavour to draw an outline of first impressions of Nature's handi- 
work in this country, or a portion thereof. I describe no circle round 
which to travel. I sketch no plan or system of operations, but simply 
and in a desultory manner, devoid of method, dot down ideas as they 
crop up. As regards the topography of the Colony, my first impres- 
sions were decidedly unfavourable. Eh ! live in this sandy wilderness 
of infertility ] Perish the thought ! Truly it was a sore disappoint- 
ment to a Briton accustomed to hawthorn hedges, ploughed land, and 
hayfields. 

Bounding the corner of Cape Eecife, we see a magnificent 
bay. Far, far ahead the noble Winterhock upheaves its mighty arms, 
and all the mountain dependents congregate around, until they seem 
at last to merge into obscurity. Leftwards stretches the Algoa coast, 
on which Port Elizabeth is situated. A visitor would imagine that 
civilization, or its enemy, had tumbled a bagfull of houses on the top 
of a rock ; some of these remained where they fell, others more pon- 
derous dispersed themselves downwards, whilst the heaviest of all 
rolled to the bottom. A practical inhabitant, unbiassed by fancy, 
opposes such a fallacious theory. The main street, running parallel to 
the beach, is admirably constructed, and the grand buildings erected 
are ornaments of skill and worthy enterprise. Nature scantily provided 
for her sister Artifice shifting sand, incorrigible rock, and poverty- 
stricken soil (!). These were her gifts, coupled to which an over- 
powering sea, backed up frequently by heavy S E winds, thundered 
its giant strength against the paltry barriers raised by human labour. 
Colonists encountered three ugly .verbs : create — destroy — alter. 
They struggled gallantly, and complete success crowned their efforts : 
skill conquering force, a fine and healthy town is the result. Thus, 
you will perceive it is not always wise to judge a locality from a 
vessel's deck. 

Similarly was I deceived in the flora and fauna. I stupidly sought for 
wild rose and blackberry,* dock and nettle, but found mimosa bushes, 
prickly pears, proteas, stunted herbage, &c., filled the vacuum. If food 
plant differed, insect life was there, and burdened pill-boxes soon 
revealed the fact that 

One insect chooses 
What another refuses, 
or, more clearly expressed — 



* The blackberry occurs here, but is probably a visitor. 



Bairstow : Natural History Notes— South Africa. 91 



It dares not object, 

When it cannot reject. 
I shall not readily forget my first ramble on African soil. The 
country, flora, fauna, atmosphere — all, all was novel to me ; and the 
grandeur of the scene, beneath a blue and cloudless sky, dispelled 
sensations of solitude which swayed a heart of sadness. Hist ! what 
is that 1 Something tall and stately, refined and graceful — a brother 
naturalist. Boldly striding with the assurance and ease of conscious 
superiority a secretary-bird parades the arid veldt, j* My companion 
is also in search of specimens, but amongst the order Opliidia per- 
chance. Believing that a stranger is poaching on preserved ground, 
he rushes (foolish, frantic bird !) far beyond my reach, proving himself 
by such an unwarrantable act no naturalist at all. A true snake- 
feeder, he is well-named both in vulgar parlance secretary, and 
scientifically Serj)entarms reptilivora, and is, I think, our largest bird, 
succeeded by the bearded vulture. Of a pale pluish plumage, thighs 
and abdomen black and brown, tail feathers black, more or less inter- 
spersed with grey, and tips white, the secretary is, of a truth, a really 
noble fellow, and admirably deserves the distinction of Government 
protection. I have seen him quite a hundred times hunting in barren 
spots and sandy places, but only once has the privilege of viewing an 
attack been accorded me. Writers speak of the bird's pouncing 
spring," and the first blow which paralyses prey," and very likely 
action is suited to the character of his victim. On the occasion of 
which I speak, he seemed to flutter his wings about after the style of 
an enraged ostrich, then daintily approaching and meditatively, as if 
mocking the reptile's antagonism, he battered his wretched dinner 
with a sharp and fierce wing-stroke, and retreated, repeating the dose 
once more, and swallowed his little enemy at one gulp. I must here 
avow a little disappointment also, whilst in the company of my 
feathered friends. Beautiful and diversified are they, beyond a doubt, 
but apparently deficient in sweet vocality. They do not melodise their 
love-whispers, and sing to us as poets say they do at home. Sky-lark 
and throstle ! I miss your cheery notes ; Christmas robin, I miss your 
scarlet vest and welcome piping of wintry welcome. Yes 1 and, dear 
old sparrow, I miss your once-despised chirrup ! chirrup I" and 
modest yet genteel attire. Why should I shrink from speaking truth 
in order to maintain the pi^estige of Old England's vocabulary li The 
cat is out of the bag ! I miss the very droppings which my native 
sparrow rain-spout lodgers playfully cast down upon the front-door 



t Pronounced by Africanders "felt.' 



92 



The Naturalist. 



steps and parlour windows. The birds, I reiterate, are lovely, but — if 
you will excuse paradox — they have not British voices. The Howers, 
too, are gorgeously grand, but they mostly lack the delicious meadow- 
scent or fragrant freshness which Britons love. Following a line of 
thought adopted through past days of youthful folly, I naturally 
concluded that existences apparently essential in one part of the globe 
may he represented hy substitutes in another part. Whether the economy 
of life corresponds I am in no position here to discuss, but merely ask 
— Does any South African bird resemble our British sky-lark, thrush, 
or robin 1 And here I quote the authority of Mr. Russell Hallack, 
whose name is not unknown at home, and whose kind assistance to all 
enquirers is proverbial. I am proud to introduce him to my York- 
shire friends, for as an original thinker and accurate observer he has 
few rivals, and possesses a pair of the hardiest legs in existence, forty- 
mile constitutionals acting upon him as sips to the tippler, viz. — thirst 
for more. 

The nearest approach to the sky-lark is Megaloplioyiis apiatus. Rising 
some twenty or thirty feet into the air, it makes a sharp cracking 
sound with its wings, and utters a long shrill piercing "phew," then 
descends suddenly to the ground. Commencing early in the morning 
before sunrise, Apiatus continues these curious antics until dusk. To 
replace the song-thrush we have Petrocincla rupestris^ or rock thrush, 
which makes a house beneath stones or favourable rocks, and deposits 
its eggs in a nest composed of fine roots and hair, quite different from 
the clay-plastered nest of an English thrush, and utters a sharp note 
much weaker in effect than that of the latter. The Cape robin, Bess- 
monius phoenicina^ frequents town residences and gardens, and does not 
much resemble our pert old redbreast, though exhibiting a similar 
wing'droop and tail movement, and uttering a note akin to that of its 
English cousin. The Cape canary, F ringilla Capensis, is sure to please 
new residents in the Colony ; also our common fink, Hyphantorius 
Capensis, This polygamous old gentleman in a consequential manner 
pays us a very fussy visit as an inspector of garden premises. If he 
discovers a favourable tree for household purposes, he starts business 
as an archilect and builder, issues information to his various wives, 
provides nests, and, presto ! a second Salt Lake City is founded. Mr. 
Hallack's garden was inspected in this manner, and upon the site 
selected a cock finch runs up no fewer than seven nests for his spouses. 
Five hens have taken possession, feathered their nests, and several are 
blessed with eggs, or infant finks. 

( To he continued. ) 



93 

^aiitfall for po&mhr. 





Height 

of 
gauge 


Rain- 
fall, 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




above 

sea 
level. 


Days 


1882. 


1881. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(.J W T(nh^or\) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

4 74 


25 




* 30*09 


5 


0-92 


TT A T T'P A V /Tf d- Sit "RfiWSSATl^ 


365 


811 


20 


48-55 


43-78 






J_iXt)JliJJO ,,, ^^iiltJU. UKlLlLiy).,. 


183 


2*98 


30 


26-06 


t22-78 


3 


0*39 


X^lJXvOi: \Jxvl Jtl ... yt/ dill eft X!yjJLJ 


350 


4*00 


26 


32*66 


+30*02 




0*47 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) 


350 


3 '46 


25 


30-24 


23-78 


19 


0-56 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


8-65 


25 


44-56 


49-90 


19 


1-75 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


4-01 


24 


31-82 


28-56 


3 


0-61 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


2-68 


23 


29-45 


23-31 


3 


0-40 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


2-43 


23 


20-433 


27-79 


3 


0-35 



* Average to date for 16 years, 1866-81. f Average of 28 years, 1853-62 & 1865-82. 
J Average of 13 years, 1870-82. 



Insect Captures in Scotland. — I send list of some of my rarer 
captures in 1882. Goleoptera : — Anthopliagus testaceus, Acidota crenata, 
Telephorus Darwin ianns. Trichoptera : — Asynarchus coenosus, Ehyacophila 
ohliterata. Lepide)ptera : — Scotosia undidata, (1 believe not recorded as a 
Scotch insect), Cedestis gysseliriella, not uncommon. — Alfred Beaumont, 
Low Valleyfield, Culross, N.B., Dec. 1st. — [S. undulata is included in 
Dr. F. B. White's Lepidoptera of Scotland." See Scottish Naturalist, 
Vol. iv., p. 221. ~G. T. P.] 

An Undetermined Yorkshire Insect. — In looking over the volume 
of the Naturalist for 1852, I found an extract from Ray, which may be of 
interest to Yorkshire entomologists. It is contained in a letter from Mr. 
J. C. Dale, asking the name of a fly which is very troublesome on the 
tops of hills in different parts of England. The passage is as follows : — 
I give the descriijtion of the insect in English, leaving its designation in 
the original Latin — Musca Apiformis montana, corpave hreviore, thorace 
nigro abdomine an.mdis nigris et ruhris alternis vario. This fly is some- 
what shorter than the honey-bee with dark thorax, the abdomen marked 
with alternate rings of black and red. The wings are grey, marked with 
a black transverse line near the tips. I have found it on the high moun- 
tains of Hinckelhaugh (Ingleborough), near Settle, a small town in the 
County of Yorkshire. It was very importunate and troublesome about 
the mountain top. This insect has no sting, but a pair of forceps at the 
tail, like those which are in the jaws of a caterpillar. It would be very 
interesting to determine what fly is thus described, and any one living 



94 



The Naturalist. 



near Settle might probably be able to solve the difficulty. Mr. Dale 
suggests it is a Tahanus or Asilus, or less likely (Estrus or Sericomyia. Is 
any British insect known which will in all respects answer this descrip- 
tion i It was evidently an insoluble problem to the naturalists of the 
last generation, and Mr. Haliday suggested to Mr. Dale that he should 
go over to Ingleborough and try to take the insect. As Mr. Dale resided 
in Dorsetshire, this would have been a long journey. I trust, however, 
some Yorkshire naturalist may take the hint. — -E. N. Bloomfield, 
Guestling Rectory, near Hastings, Dec. 15th, 1882. 

Habits of Psijlliodes hyoscyami. — Some years ago, whilst on a visit to a 
friend, I was capturing this beetle for several days. I found it most 
readily on the young plants of HyoscyawAis niger ; its presence is betrayed 
by the habit of eating small round holes in the leaves. Like its congeners 
it gives a jump when alarmed, and if found will be lying on its back, 
exhibiting only, the deep black underside, and looking as much as 
anything like a small bit of coal on the soil. But it is not worth while 
for the collector to hunt after one which has thus given him the slip ; he 
has only to remove to a short distance and the beetle will soon return to 
the plant. I could not learn anything about the larva ; the proprietor of 
the grounds assured me that the holes were made by the perfect insect ; 
they are similar to those made by Orchestes fagi in the leaves of the beech, 
but proportionally larger. — Benj. Cooke, 63, Windsor-road, Southport, 
Nov. 6th, 1882. 

ENTOMOLOGICAL NOTES.- Whilst collecting with Mr, S. L. 
Mosley in the rough field adjoining Lepton Great Wood, near here, on 
the 12th of June last, we found many of the flowers of Ranunculus 
hulhosns closed up with silken threads, and tenanted each by a single 
Tortrix larva ; but although the flowers seemed all to be closed up in pretty 
much the same way, there were evidently two species of larvae of very 
distinct form and pattern. In July they produced Sciaphila pascuana 
{pasivana) and Sphaleroptera ictericana freely and in about equal numbers, 
and one well-marked specimen of Sciaphila octomaculana. The two former 
species seem to be previously unrecorded for the county. Towards the end 
of October I found a lot of old wool which had lain in the warehouse (in 
the centre of the town) for some months, swarming with Tinese, and 
comprised of six species. The most numerous was Tinea biseliella ; then 
^cophora pseudo-spretclla, then Tinea tapetzella, T. pallescentellaj T. 
pellionella, and Endrosis fenestrella. Of these the pseudo-spretella were 
all dead, but the others living ; and, indeed, on looking at the wool again 
at the end of November, biseliella seemed to be almost as plentiful as ever. 
On finding so many moths, I felt sure the parasites could not be far ofl", and 
had scarcely sooner looked for, than found a dozen or more ichneumons 
amongst them, mostly dead, but two lively enough. These, Mr. Bridg- 
man has written me, are Hemiteles hicolorinus (which is new to the county 
list) and a Braconid he did not know. Some Trichoptera I captured in 



Reports of Societies. 



95 



Edlington Wood on August 5th last^ Mr. M'Lachlan has named Glypho- 
toelius pelluciduSy Limnophilus spar.suSy and L. mttatus ; and a neuropteron 
from Huddersfield on Sept. 16th, Hemerohius suhnehulosus. — Geo. T. 

PoRRITT. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society.— Meeting Dec. 21st, Mr. T. Lister 
in the chair. — The president. (Dr. Lancaster) read a paper — Notes on 
the Skeletons of Birds," with illustrations, including skull and beak of 
the eagle, pigeon, showing wing-bones, and how adapted for flight ; crop 
of capercailzie filled with particles of heather and moorland plants. He 
explained the organisation of birds as adapted to their manner of pro- 
curing their food, and their choice of situation, and general habits. 

Meeting, Dec. 5th, Mr. T. Lister presiding. — Mr. J. Broadhead read 
a paper on The Wood Ant." The latest date for the house martin is 
Oct. 30th. Eleven wild geese flew from E to S W, Nov. 22nd. A gold- 
crest was observed in Ackworth School garden, also several of the thrush 
family, supposed to be redwings. — T. L. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Nov. 28th, the president 
(Mr. Jagger) in the chair. — The recorder of the entomological section, 
Mr. J. W. Carter, reported on the work done during the year 1882. He 
gave the first list of the coleoptera of the district, which comprised about 
90 species, chiefly collected in Airedale during the past year, and stated 
that a good number of species had been added to the list of lepidoptera, 
which was accounted for by the fact that the micros had received a 
greater share of attention than in the past. 

Annual Meeting, Dec. 5th, v. p. Mr. Soppitt in the chair, who 
exhibited specimens of Eirneola avricula-Judcea irom Cottingley, Plan- 
orhis nitidus from Shipley — new to the district, — and the following, on 
behalf of Messrs. E. P. P. and J. A. Butterfield, of Wilsden : — Helix 
caperata from Cottingley, and a specimen of the snow-bunting, recently 
obtained near Wilsden. The annual reports as read by the secretary 
showed the society to be in a healthy and prosperous condition. The 
election of officers for the ensuing year resulted as follows : — president^ 
Mr. J. W. Carter ; corresponding secretary, Mr. Oxley, &c. 

Annual Soiree, Dec. 12th, the president, Mr. J. W. Carter, in the 
chair. — Addresses, readings, recitations, &c., were given by several 
members and friends. The usual votes of thanks concluded a very 
pleasant evening. — H. L. O. 

Huddersfield Naturalists' Society. — Annual meeting, Dec. 11th, 
Mr. C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., in the chair. — The report showed considerable 
progress made by the society during the past year. New rooms had been 
acquired ; the library had undergone re-arrangement ; and many old 
books had been disposed of, and new ones purchased. A rule had also 



H 



96 



The Naturalist. 



been passed admitting ladies at about half the usual fee, and several had 
already joined. The School Board had granted permission for the society 
to use any of their schools for ramble meetings, free of expense ; and the 
Corporation had promised to devote a portion of the new Beaumont Park 
for the purpose of a Botanic Garden. The balance-sheet showed over 
£12 in hand. A district was also defined, and a map ordered to be 
printed and inserted in every member's book. The ofiicers for the next 
year were elected as follows: — President, C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S. ; cor- 
responding sec, S. L. Mosley ; librarian, G. H. Crowther, &c.— S.L. M. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting, 
Nov. 27th, the president, Mr. S. J. Capper, in th^ chair.— Mr. T. Yon 
Sobbe read an essay from a work on the North- American Noctuidse, 
entitled A Colony of Butterflies," in which the writer referred to the 

white mountain butterfly" {(Eneis semidea) which inhabits the Wash- 
ington Mountain, Kew England, at an altitude of never lower than 5,600 
feet. Mr. A. Short read a paper on Connecting Links," in which he 
endeavoured to disprove the possibility of the occurrence of links 
connecting the difierent orders of the animal kingdom. The paper gave 
rise to considerable discussion. The hon. sec. Dr. John W. Ellis, read a 
continuation of his Coleoptera of the Liverpool District," (Part III.), 
enumerating, besides additional localities for many species recorded in 
Parts I. and II., 15 species of Geodephaga and Hydradephaga, now for 
the first time recorded from the district ; after which he mentioned the 
localities of 43 species of Palpicornia occurring in this neighbourhood. 
During the conversazione Mr. E. R. Billington exhibited several locusts 
from the West Indies ; Mr. Wilding and Dr. Elhs, specimens of the rare 
beetle A7ithicns himaculatus, captured at Crosby. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. ^ — Meeting, Nov. 20th, Captain 
Cunlifle in the chair. — The last part of the New Moss Flora " by Dr. 
Braithwaite, was presented to the society by the author. A number of 
freshly-gathered mosses were placed upon the table, having been sent 
from Orme's Head by Mr. W. Jones, of Llandudno ; some interesting 
species were distributed amongst the members. The hon. sec. exhibited 
specimens of Hypnum virescens (Boulay), which had been gathered on the 
Pyrenees, and also at Goodall, Malham, by John Nowell, in the year 
1849, but were named as a variety of H. commutatum at that time. Dr. 
J. B. Wood sent specimens of Myurella apiculata and Lescuricea striata in 
fruit ; these were Continental specimens from his very complete herba- 
rium of British and Continental mosses. Mr. Foster exhibited a si^ecimen 
of Phegopteris vulgaris, showing a very remarkable variation from the 
typical form, the pinnae of the fronds being cut up into long narrow 
lobes after the style of Polypodium vnlgare, var. cornuhiense. If the 
variety proves to be constant, it will make a nice addition to varieties of 
British ferns in cultivation. He found this last August, in Patterdale. — 
Thos. Rogers. 



SCARCITY OF WINTER BIRDS. 
By Geo. Roberts. 

Since the end of September, the scarcity of birds in this, the Loft- 
house district, has been remarkable. No flocks of redwings, fieldfares 
or bramblings appeared at the usual time. Few bullfinches have been 
seen, and tree-sparrows are much less frequent than they were last 
winter. Fieldfares have been observed in this district in gradually 
decreasing numbers for nine or ten years, and redwings have been 
noticed in less numbers for six years. 

About the end of last October, the only birds seen by the writer 
during a walk of two miles along a brook-side, were, in addition to 
house sparrows, one robin, one chaffinch, and one blue titmouse. The 
scarcity does not arise from lack of food : haws, and various other 
winter fruits were, and still are, tolerably plentiful ; and the weather, 
save about one week when deep snow covered the ground, has been 
mild and favourable. 

It has long been surmised that birds from northern districts move 
southward at the beginning of winter, and that the deserted districts 
are partially filled up by birds from more northern regions : in other 
words, there has always been a general tendency among what are 
called resident birds to emigrate southward before or during winter. 
The question arises— may the four or five severe winters that we have 
had lately, have encouraged and developed that inherent tendency to 
migrate southward, or may they have induced some entirely new 
migration] Immense numbers of our small birds have perished 
during the arctic winters that we experienced previous to 1881-2 ; if 
such winters had continued, and no migration or shifting of quarters 
had taken place, nearly all of our small birds would have been exter- 
minated* When we find that birds perish from cold and hunger when 
a southward flight of five or six hours would place them in a more 
genial and bountiful region, a want of fore-knowledge and instinct 
seems to be displayed, so that it is not unreasonable to suppose that 
the series of severe winters might have quickened the migrative 
impulse, and caused them to withdraw from northern latitudes in 
greater numbers, and, as just hinted, new or more lengthy preservative 
migrations may have originated. All migrations must have had a 
beginning, and they are subject, like everything else, to modification. 
When once a bird, or a flock of birds, have been driven to take a 
longer flight, or to deviate from the usual course, we may infer that 
N,S,, Vol. viii.. Feb., 1883. 



98 



The NATtfHALTST. 



the journey each day will not be forgotten, and that the impulse to 
take the same route especially if the journey has been favourable and 
preservative, will not be lost when the same seasonal circumstances 
come round again. 

The following birds are migratory in Scandinavia : — rook, starlings 
redbreast, song thrush, pied wagtail, meadow pipit, hedge sparrow, 
black-headed bunting, skylark, wood-lark, brown linnet, chaflSnch, haw- 
finch, ring-dove, and stock-dove ; that is to say, they leave in autumn 
for Central or Southern Europe, and it is not improbable that many 
of our birds may leave us and join them in their winter quarters. It 
is true that accessions of birds are regularly observed in autumn in 
Britain, but as a rule these birds will only form the outer fringe of the 
migrative tide that is passing along the Continent ; and on their 
arrival here they do not stay long in one place, unless there happens to 
be an abundance of food in their path, but keep shifting, and eventu- 
ally are lost to observation. It is rational to conceive that terrestrial 
birds will keep as much to the land as possible on the Continent, and 
not risk themselves across the North Sea. When they appear in extra- 
ordinary numbers on our coasts, the occurrence doubtless arises from 
their being driven from their course by storms, rather than from any 
inclination or eagerness to visit us, because our northern shores in 
winter are nearly as forbidding and inhospitable as those the birds are 
deserting. 

It would be interesting to learn if the scarcity of winter birds is 
general over Britain, or if accessions have been observed in the south 
of England. If the scarcity is merely local, the idea of an over-sea 
migration can scarcely maintain its ground, and we may consider it 
more likely due to insular, partial movements. 

Lofthouse, Wakefield, Jan. 5th, 1883. 



A PHYSIOLOGICAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE BRITISH 
LEPIDOPTERA.* 

By a. H. Swinton. 



The Linnsean system of arrangement being enunciated as a linear 
projection of a Darwinian tree of descent, it becomes evident the 
clearer we can trace the gradation of the organic structures in any 
group of life-forms, the more perfectly we shall be able to marshal their 
columns and draw them up into a single front. Nor is it necessary 

* Read at a recent Meeting of the Entomological Society of London. 



SwiNToN : Physiological Arrangement of Iiepidoptera. 99 

to our intent that we should be acquainted with all the scions of the 
group in question, past and present, any more than it is essential to an 
artist that every leaf and twig appear in a painting ; for, when links 
are missing, the shadowy tree of life is not one whit less perfectly 
indicated by coupling aright those that come under our immediate 
observation. The simpler the material, the bolder the drawing* 

In the Naturalist for Oct., 1881 (p. 45) I observed that it has been a 
long standing practice with authors of works on British butterflies to 
treat the five groups represented in this country in the following 
order : — -Papilionidae, Nymphalidse, Erycinidae, Lycaenidae, and Hes- 
peridse ; but that since the first family, according to Dr. Scudder and 
others, has close affinity with the last, the method is only plausible on 
the principle of extremes meeting, the better arrangement every way 
being Nymphalidse, Erycinidae, Lycaenidae, Papilionidae and Hes- 
peridae. I also added that if physiological reasons could ever be got 
to prevail over the fancy for having the butterflies first, I would like- 
wise suggest a further arrangement of the five groups of lepidoptera, 
showing the development of a structure at the base of the abdomen 
attributed with the faculty of hearing, that highest of insect senses, 
thus : Noctuina, Bombycina, Geometrina, Butterflies, and Sphingina. 

Since writing this, a new light has broken upon the subject, and it 
has become evident to me that the Darwinian tree may be co-ordinated 
with two lines ; namely, that discovered by Linnaeus, in which the 
mere connexion of the organism being taken into consideration, the 
branches are thus projected vertically as the shadows fall, and that of 
more late origin that has taken its rise in the study of structural 
development, where the branches are projected hori:2ontally, and the 
degree of perfection of the species is also estimated. The horizontal 
line of Linngeus thus shows the connexion or the scions in families and 
genera, the vertical line of the Darwinian school indicates the evolution 
of races as far as progression is implicated ; and we must believe there 
has been, on the whole, such progressive development of lepidoptera, 
although there is not extant sufficient geological evidence to quarrel 
about. But whether true in causation as in actuality, that arrange- 
ment of the groups of the lepidoptera which I have suggested, may be 
taken as a good outline of the new structural and physiological method 
which I have previously advocated in my Insect Variety ; while 
that worked out with so much pains by Edward Newman, will furnish 
a good example of the Linnaean or horizontal co-ordination. 

I will now show how his latest systematic co-ordination may be 
projected vertically, and with what result. Instead of the arrangemeiifc 



100 



The Natuealist. 



Diurni, Nocturni, Geometrae, Drepanulse, Pseudo-Bombyces, Noctu^. 
and Deltoides, as adopted by that author, ranking the insect from 
physiological data we should have the following order : — Noctuge^ 
Pseudo Bombyces, Drepanulse, Deltoides, Geometras, Bombyces (or the 
Nocturni of Newman's arrangement from the genus Procris to the 
genus Saturnia), Diurni and Sphingina (or the remaining portion of 
the Nocturni of Newman). 

It is evident we have in this way greater harmony as regards 
structure, and that certain insects of lower organic perfection than the 
rest are more thrown together, instead of being isolated as heretofore 
among those more highly organised, as always must result from a 
horizontal projection. The Deltoides where certain of the males are 
fan-footed, ally themselves with the falcate-winged Drepanul^ ; the 
Noctuae, in the fan-footed Catocalse bridge over the passage to the fan- 
footed Geometrse ; the tailed Geometrse of the genus Urapteryx form 
a passage to the genera of the Bombyces, Saturnia, and Endromis ; 
while both Geometers and Bombyces alike exhibit transition to the 
butterflies. The Diurni, or butterflies, again, pass into the Sphingina 
and their allies, where we And assorted such rudimentary forms as the 
genera Hepialus and Psychidse, that form a natural passage to the case- 
bearing micro-lepidoptera. Another link, according to Mr. A. G. 
Butter, is found in the clear-winged ^geriidse (Trans. Ent. Soc, 1878, 
p. 121), and these lowly forms, by way of the aquatic genera oi the 
Pyralides, Acentropus, and Hydrocampa, form a transition to the 
trichopterous forms of ti e Neuroptera. 

If anyone is desirous of further following up this essay towards a 
fresh arrangement of 11. e British Lepidoptera, I should suggest the 
procuring of an exchange list such as is sold by Mr. Cooke, of Museum- 
street. If he then will number the groups from the Noctuse. back- 
wards as suggested, and draw a line dividing the first two columns of 
the Nocturni from the last four, the matter will flash upon him at once. 
Perhaps he may gain thereby some new light regarding the mysterious 
tree of life. 

July 26th, 1882. 

THE GOOSEBERRY CATERPILLAR, OR LARVA OF 
NEMJTUS RlBESIl. 
By Miss Okmekod, F.M.S. 
[Abstract of Paper in Jouh. Roy. Coll. Agkic. Cirencester.] 
The Gooseberry Sawfly is perhaps one of the commonest of our garden 
pests, and by means of its caterpillars regularly year by year causes 
damage from, we might say, one end of the kingdom to the other. It 



Ormerod : The Gooseberry Caterpillar. 



101 



is at the same time a thoroughly good example of how, by a knowledge 
of the habits of a so-called pest, also a little thought on the reasons for 
good or bad action of the remedies, an injurious attack may be kept 
down with very little trouble and hardly any expense. In this case 
intinite trouble is yearly taken in pinching the grubs, shaking, dusting, 
syringing, trampling, and all kinds of remedial means, too often with 
very little effect, except in the case of Hellebore powder, which if 
properly done and with good powder, appears to get rid of the attack 
very surely, but at the same time has the disadvantage that if applied 
near the time when the berries are to be of service for table use (unless 
great care is taken in clearing them of the powder), the eaters are in 
danger of severe — possibly fatal — illness. A far simpler course is to 
clear away the coming brood in the larva state from beneath the bushes. 
If we start the attack — say of 1882 — from its very beginning it stands 
thus: — In the autumn of IBS I the caterpillars of the last brood when 
full fed went down from the bushes into the ground, perhaps only two 
inches deep, but if the soil was light, possibly to a depth of six or 
eight inches. Here they made themselves each a cocoon, or outer 
casing of a kind of secretion, which formed a bluntly oval brown case, 
about half-an-inch long, in which each grub or larva passed the winter 
still in its larval state. When spring came, and the gooseberry and 
currant bushes were coming into leaf, then the grub changed to the 
chrysalis, and the chrysalis shortly developed, and from it came the 
perfect gooseberry sawfly, to lay its eggs and thus start a brood of 
caterpillars on the young leafage just ready for them to feed on. Here 
we see at once how to forestall attack, and practically the point is 
worked forward in some of the gooseberry growing districts near Isle- 
worth. If the soil is removed from beneath the gooseberry bushes 
after the fall of the leaf, with this soil we remove the grubs, and are 
just in that proportion freer from attack next year. But some degree 
of care is necessary, and want of this at times leaves the larvae as much 
in possession (for all practical purposes) as if nothing had been done. 
The earth and contained grubs ought to be so disposed of by burning, 
throwing where it will be trampled on, or other means, that these 
grubs will be destroyed, or they will develope as if nothing had been 
done, and if left near the bushes, the sawflies will (as in previous 
generations) as soon as developed just walk or fly to the new leafage 
and start the new course of injury. A good example of this was given 
in a case where, last autumn, the earth was disturbed and removed in 
due course from beneath the bushes of a gooseberry ground near Isle- 
worth, but it was not taken away. Month after month it lay in lines 



102 



The Naturalist. 



between the rows of the gooseberry bushes, and (presumably) there, 
u?ider it, the larva; passed the winter unhurt, and all ready for spring 
action, for now, on the 6th of July, the bushes in many cases are badly 
stripped, and the caterpillar of the summer brood may be seen, with 
its bluish green skin spotted with black, and in its characteristic 
position, that is, fastened by its caudal proleg to the surface of the leaf, 
and by the others to the gnawed edge on which it is feeding. When 
once these grubs are in possession, remedies are troublesome to apply, 
and, in districts where gooseberry growing is one of the gardening 
trades, co-operation is necessary to destroy the pest" totally. How 
ever, there are a very large proportion of cases in which, by examining 
the soil to see how deep the grub cases lie, and then clearing them 
away and destroying them, much good would be done. 



NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 

( Continued.) 
By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

I MUST now continue my first walk on African soil, and spare diver- 
gent pleasures. When an acquaintance returns from foreign parts, we 
naturally ask, What did you see but on the face of it this is a 
stupid question. What does he not see 1 Out of a world of novelties 
I choose the most striking — those which, once seen, are ever remem- 
bered — first impressions, pleasant reminiscences — Olim meminisse 
juvabit. Tortoises abounded on the flats, and I counted over fifty 
dead carcases, bleached and decaying. Millipedes {hdim?) were in 
countless thousands — living, dead, and dying ; indeed the Myriapoda 
represent a grand study, though hitherto apparently neglected, for I 
cannot find a published work on South African species. Turning over 
a stone on the slope of Cradock's Kloof, I was delighted to come 
across a small family of scorpions. At first the fighting fiends, or 
inveterate poisoners,* were torpid and motionless, but a gentle tap on 
the anal weapon of self-defence provoked some annoyance. They 
fenced and guarded in a wonderful manner, and bold as brass ; they 
were also sneakish as puff-adders, never losing sight of a chance to 
make a bolt, and elude further vigilance and warfare. I speedily 
discovered that in order to bottle my formidable antagonists I must 
extemporise a rude instrument of capture, a la forceps. Experience 
lias &ince taught me there are few " police bracelets " to beat ancient 

* The poison is emitted through a small orifice situated over spur of tail, and 
fsomected to the main supply. 



Bairstow : Natural History Notes — South Africa. 103 

sugar-tongs or wooden clothes-clips. It is a fact worthy of passing 
remark that kloofs and mountains maintain the highest vegetative 
development upon their southern slopes. I have observed also that 
scorpions prefer a southern position, and are somewhat gregarious in 
disposition. 

Rivers bisecting or subdividing localities, separating human habita- 
tions into states and sections, spread out their tributary arms for the 
dispersion of animal tribes and species, each diminutive territory 
evincing a distinct generic or specific faunal and floral localisation at 
once striking and significant. On this slope occurs one species of 
Arachnid ; on that, another quite dissimilar. I submit no theory of 
universality, nor do I desire to place undue stress thereupon ; never- 
theless, a collecting-box comparatively regulated and stored will 
reveal, in a couple of hoards from different positions, a wonderful 
contradiction of natural existences. I remember New Brighton, 
Cheshire, as the happy hunting ground for IV, zomria, and Penmaen- 
mawr for J. contiguarla. Of course food-plant may partly solve the 
problem of eccentricity in both insects ; and whilst the Cheshire sand- 
hills provide peculiar advantages in respect of position, &c., for zonaria, 
it is quite probable that much patient search will eke out a new 
locality for coutlguaria^ endowed by Nature with equal requirements for 
this insect's welfare. But here, a paltry stream cutting up level 
ground where food-plants on either side apparently correspond, separ- 
ates families and separates species. Here is a tiny brook; on either 
hand a declivity. Zerltls Jlphfjeus* — (I humbly scrape to thee, O 
Prince of Lyc(2nid.(E\) — patronises a southern ground, and rarely, 
though a magnificent flyer, intrudes upon the opposite domain. 

Away with fancy freaks and theory ! Buzz ! Buzz ! Bzzz ! Is it a 
bee % Buzz ! or a wasp ] Buzz ! It is a beetle. Buzz, Buzz, Bzzz % 
Please remark, the final consummation of Buzzes changes form. What 
a trifle to write about, I hear you say. No, sir, not a trifle. The 
final buzz has led me to many a grand Buprestis. Netting is useless 
amongst Mimosa bushes, whose thorn- spikes have demoralised into 
shreds the well-cut breeches of more than one astute Coleopterist, My 
maxim is " Wait, watch, listen." When the last hermaphrodite Buzz, 
indicating curiosity satisfied, is pronounced, then I go for that beetle. 
A tap on the bush, and whack tumbles the old grumbler into my 
helmet. It is impossible to conceive a more beautiful inseot than 
Hirsuta of the South. The head, thorax and elytra are sprinkled with 
gamboge — yellow tufts of powdery hair ; and over the base of 
* An extremely local butterfly. 



104 



The Naturalist. 



antennae and hind legs are two tufts of bright scarlet, with a row of 
seven tufts of the same colour running along the Elytra codce^ 
gradually diminishing in size from base to apex. I have described 
this insect"^ in a rough manner, not paying attention so much to 
scientific and synoptical nomination as the subject warrants. My 
desire is merely to give you a reflective idea " of the wondrous 
beauty of this noble Coleopteron, and spare you the disgust of any 
pedantic assumption. To select one type of loveliness amongst the 
Buprestidce in preference to others is a difficult task ; and to my mind, 
many of the smallest and most slighted species are superior to their 
big relations in every respect save clumsiness. In Hirsuta's company 
I found a splendid Longicorn — Zoographab oculator and Cantharis — 
Mulahris oculata ; also a large number of Longhorns, commonly termed 
"Spanish Flies ".f These are readily discovered, as they diffuse a 
strong, and not unpleasant J odour of lasting power. An Africander 
youngster who accosted me one day, gave them the name of 
" Smellers;" and he was not far wrong. They always appear to be 
friendly, however, and to pedestrian Naturalists, who now and again 
sniff Kaffir location breezes, the selection of the least of two evils 
produces ''peace, good-will" towards "Smellers." As I journey 
along, the inevitable Ceto7iia, yclept Fachnoda marginata buzzes about 
on all sides. This insect, whose bump of destructiveness is so 
extraordinarily developed, is a perfect pest to horticulturists, ex- 
hibiting, as it does, a ruining propensity for dahlias, and those of the 
most perfect kind in particular. I strongly suspect Marginata is 
opposed to Blue Ribbon Army principles. Mr. Wilson, the affable 
botanist and chief gardener of St. George's Park, in this town, ordered 
a certain tree to be cut down. From the stump issued, as I believe, 
sap of an alcoholic kind. The top of this stump in circumference would 
be about twelve to eighteen inches, and thereon liquored, in a most 
reprehensible manner, over a dozen fat Marginatas, evidently acting on 
the maxim " First come, soonest served.'' The sight swelled my 
bosom with indignation, and inwardly I heaved a sigh of compassion ; 
and though I do not aspire to teetotalism, a " kinder sort'er hope 
busted up*' that before long Sir Wilfrid Lawson would visit the 
Eastern province. From the aforesaid incident and addendum which 
follows, experimental philosophers might sketch a moral lesson, for 
Marginata is one of the very few beetles § which deteriorates in spirits. 



* Julodis hirsuta. — Prof. Westwood (authority), 
t A weak Provincialism. J Opinions differ on this point, 

\ § I mean deceased beetles of course. 



Bairstow : Natural History Notes— South Africa. 105 



The sober brown colour of its elytra is displaced by a shade of 
Isabella. 

After capturing a few Marginatas at pleasure, I come across another 
fine Longhorn, a species of Ceroplesis. This genus is well represented 
here, but as the various species are so closely allied, and differences 
minute, I refrain from inserting doubtful names. A pretty little 
Cicindela Capensis (]), evidently out of its latitude, because unaccom- 
panied by friends, rushes in a semi-flighty manner across the sandy 
path. The ^' pop ''of a drawn cork, and one slight seething hiss, 
announces— Verdict : "Death by drowning;" and my Tiger Beetle 
succumbs to fumes of liquid gin. I have labelled this insect 
" Doubtful," for a simple reason that, as 1 presume there are two 
species occurring simultaneously together, and very much alike, I have 
not yet persuaded myself — which is which ? 

Capturing two specimens of the huge Mantnora (possibly Maxillusa), 
a fine Antlda thoracica, recognised by all Coleopterists, Anthia 10- 
guttataj and several dung-rollers, I re-commence the stone-turning 
process. As an old minister used to remark when desirous of 
emphasing a grand point, and bringing it home to his audience, " put 
your finger on "the stone-turning process. It merits a moment's 
digression. Our fathers have taught us that Rolling stones gather no 
moss. Slightly altered to the tune of Entomology, this proverb stands 
thus : EoUing of stones discloses lots of beetles. The idea is 
axiomatic. Are you acquainted with some aspiring student, or 
would-be author, who, anxious to write a book on Natural History, 
pining for criticism and everlasting fame, yet lacketh the one thing 
needful — a subject 1 Let him take the cue from my advice, and 
christen his book " Stone-turning," with an inaugural and fashionable 
couplet, something after this style : 

A stone o'er hurled 
Eeveals a world ! 

If insects could speak to us in some known language ; if each departed 
grub had left us the legacy of its history ; if the swaddling clothes 

of chrysalids, discarded in imagin(e)ary flights j If 

I must dissemble. Labyrinthine realms of Fancy's ifs," will lead 
me into endless misery unless the sequel is broached. I say, then, 
that as there are " books in running brooks," so there is a world 
beneath a pebble. Kneeling upon the ground, pipe in my mouth* 
straining every nerve, I succeed in topsy-turveying a big stone, and 
rush forward to investigate — what ? The stock of an old curiosity 



* Tobacco is conducive to discovery. 



106 



The Naturalist. 



shop ; emblems of a thousand histories ; tragedies, fictions and farces ; 
curious specimens of animated matter ; carcases of deceased beings ; 
germs of future lives ; and perfected atoms. What a sentimental 
medley ! snails, slugs, beetles, bugs, millipedes and caterpillars, ants, 
spiders, scorpions, and orthopterous creatures in all stages of existence. 

But at present I am " Bairstow on Beetles,'' not " Bairstow on the 
World." There are nearly a dozen species of Coleoptera revealed to 
view, one of which I recognise as Anthia. It is of a dusky colour, with 
metallic bronze-like lustre on the elytra, utterly devoid of spots or 
markings, but an Antkia nevertheless, a stridulous Anthia^ and a 
gregarious AntJiia . The moment an intruder was announced, this 
family squeaked vengennce in loud and unmeasured terms ; indeed 
half-a-dozen young mice could scarcely excel in the vituperative 
department. That such a faculty with this insect, is provided as an 
intelligible medium of communication, or warning of danger, I have 
not the slightest hesitation in asserting, and feel assured that expres- 
sive and sympathetic utterances are produced from apprehension of 
consequences, a remarkable discernment of possible calamity affecting 
the entire community. When I handle one of them it immediately 
vociferates against such encroachment upon the liberty of a natural 
subject, but the cry is not continued, and extra violence or oppressive 
digitation does not compel emotion. 

(To be continued.^ 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

neaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1882. 


1881. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

4-22 


21 


37-24 


* 33-55 


6 


1-37 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


6-70 


21 


55-25 


49-28 






Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


2-98 


27 


29-04 


t24-85 


26 


0-49 


HORSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


3-89 


24 


36-55 


:32-80 


6 


0-72 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


5-15 


24 


35-39 


26-25 


6 


1-63 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


5-95 


25 


50-51 


45-13 


6 


1-70 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


6-59 


23 


37-41 


31-74 


6 


1-79 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


4-99 


20 


34-44 


25-29 


6 


1-63 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


5-49 


19 


33-28 


§25-96 


6 


1-91 



* Average to date for 16 years, 1866-81. f Average of 28 years, 1853-62 & 1865-82. 
t Average of 13 years, 1870-82. 
§ The annual average for 30 years, 1850-79, is 22-347 on 151-15 days. 



Smith : Rainfall Observations. 



107 



RAINFALL : 

KESULTS OF 25 YEARS' OBSER\^ATIONS ON THE BEVERLEY 
ROAD, HULL. 



YEARLY FALL. 



Year. 


Fall in 
Inches. 


*Days. 


1858 


22-42 


135 


1859 


21-12 


170 


1860 


31-74 


205 


1861 


19*97 


163 


1862 


23*69 


174 


1863 


24*63 


155 


1864 


18*27 


152 


1865 


23 80 


170 


1866 


29*20 


202 


1867 


24*10 


184 


1868 


26*54 


163 


1869 


28*29 


189 


1870 


25-81 


172 


1871 


25*69 


170 


1872 


36-51 


221 


1873 


22*09 


180 


1874 


20*19 


176 


1875 


28*87 


178 


1876 


30*77 


191 


1877 


29*33 


222 


1878 


27*86 


212 


1879 


25*92 


189 


1880 


31*94 


172 


1881 


27*61 


194 


1882 


33*91 


205 





Inches. 


Days. 




26*42 


182 


Wettest Year— 1872 


36-51 


221 


Year with largest number 






of Days— 1877 


29.33 


222 


Driest Year— 1864 


18*27 


152 


Year with least number of 






Days— 1858 


22*42 


135 



AVERAGE 
YEARLY FALL IN EACH^ 
FIVE YEARS. 



Years. 



1858 to 1863, 

1863 to 1867 

1868 to 1872 

1873 to 1877, 

1878 to 1882 



Inches. D ays. 



23-79 
24*00 
28*57 
26-25 
29-44 



169 
173 
183 
189 
194 



^ Days— by " Days" is meant the number of days in which any rain was measured, 
without any reieience to quantity. A Fall of One Inch of Rain is equal to 100 Tons per 
Acre. 



Number of Days in 
which 1 inch or more fell 
in the 25 Years. 



January 2 

February 0 

March 1 

April 3 

May 2 

June 2 

July 8 

August 12 

September 7 

October 6 

November 2 

December 4 



49 



Heaviest Fall in one day 
2-00 on August 21, 1858 



AVERAGE RAINFALL FOR THE 20 
YEAkS 1860 TO 1879. 



At Hull 26-16 

„ Leeds 24*08 

„ Sheffield 31*97 

„ Malton 27*95 

„ Manchester 34*66 

„ Bolton 46-38 

„ Lincoln ...... 22*28 

,, Hunstanton 21*41 



At London 26*46 

Exeter 33 22 

Penzance ... 44-15 

Edinburgh 37*84 

Belfast 35.57 

Seathwaite, 
Cumberland 144*50 



Fall of Rain at the Stye Head of Borrow- 
dale, in 1872, amounted to 243*98 inches. 



HAROLD SMITH, F.M.S. 
Fulford House, Hull, January, 1883. 



108 



The Na^turalist. 



The total Rainfall for the Six Months— October, 1857, to March, 1858, 
"was only 3*58. 

The average Fall for each 5 years shows a steady increase in number of 
days on which Rain was measured, and a similar increase in quantity, 
with the exception of the fourth period, the average of which was reduced 
by the two dry years 1873 and 1874 ; the last period shewing an average 
annual excess of 3 inches over the year's average fall for the 25 years. 

Wettest Half-year was the second half of 1880, with fall of 22-27. 



Badgers m Yorkshire. — In compliance with Mr. George Roberta' 
request for a list of the occurrences of the above animals in Yorkshire, 
I report for this district as follows : — One Sunday morning in 1832, Mr. 
John Taylor, of StainlaYid, went into Hardplatts Wood, accompanied by 
his famous dog Jack." They encountered a fine full-grown badger, and 
inmiediately commenced the struggle for existence. Mr. Taylor was not 
slow to perceive that the badger was going to be the fittest, but, providing 
himself with a heavy cudgel, after a tough fight he secured the survival 
for his four-footed companion. Less than three years ago, a fine badger 
Wtis caught in Turner Wood, Rish worth ; it is in the possession of Mr. 
Wheelwright, of Ripponden, on whose estate it was captured. It was 
thought to be an escape. — C. C. Hanson. 

ENTOMOLOG-ICAL NOTES.— A short time ago Mr. A. E. Atmore 
sent me a series of Tortrix Lafanryana, a species he had added to the 
British list from specimens taken at King's Lynn in 1880, and which 
species had been announced as new to science in France so recently as 
1876. During the past season Mr. Atmore reared it rather freely 
from larvai found feeding between united leaves and tops of Myrica qale. 
W^hen in London last month, Mr. W. H. Tugwell very kindly gave me a 
fine series of each of No/a centonalis, Emiomos autvmnaria (alniaria) and 
Nyctegretes achatinella — all from Deal recently. I am also indebted to 
Mrs. Frazer for a nice set of Gramhus furcatellus, captured by herself in 
the Highlands of Scotland during the past summer ; and lately I have 
ascertained that some tortrices I netted in Wicken Fen last Whitsuntide, 
and which had been put on one side since then, include Phoxopteryx 
pahidana, P. hiarcuana, and P. siculmia. — G. T. Porritt. 

Entomological Notes from York. — The past unfavourable season has 
not furnished you with many good lists of captures from collectors through- 
out the county ; and I think it cannot be questioned but that there has 
been a decided dearth amongst all orders of insect life, from what causes 
it is difiicult to say, unless the three or four j)receding bad seasons have 
been effectual in destroying, in some stage or other, insect life. In this 
neighbourhood, the Diurni have been particularly noticeable by their 
absence, as I only remember seeing one A. cardami7ieSy one A. Atalanta, 
a few F. iirticcey no P. Phlceas, and no L. Alexis, although P. hrassicoe and 



Short Notes and Queries. 



Napi were fairly common. The same may be said of the Sphingidse and 
Bombycidse — one aS. ocellatus larva, one or two D. vinula, and one bifida, 
no larvse of B. qnercus, B.furcula, or E. lanestris. The Geometrse were sub- 
ject to the same conditions. I did not give the Noctnee trial all the season 
with sugar, so I cannot speak so certainly of them, but I believe they were 
affected in like manner. However, I have met with a few which 1 had not 
previously taken in this locality. Diaitthcecia cucuhali : I reared a number 
of this from larvai found on Lychnis floscuculi. They are very hardy 
larvae, not requiring near so much attention as Eupithecia dodoneata. 
Early in April I was glad to see in my room a specimen of this pug, 
the larva of which I had beaten from oak the previous season. I 
have also the pleasure to add to my list Chrysoclista himacA delta. This 
rare and pretty little insect fell to my beating-stick in this neighbourhood ; 
I hope I shall be able to find more of it another season. Tinea fulvimi- 
trella^ another rare species, turned up in this locality ; also GelecMa 
lumlella. A very good example of Lavema ochraceella turned up in 
fair numbers. It has the open habit of sitting on the upper side of the 
leaves of Epilobium hirsutum quietly until boxed, though it requires a 
sharp eye to detect its presence. The Terebrant portion of the Hymen- 
optera have been more plentiful, especially in the early part of the year. 
I found amongst them the following :—Ichnenmon varipeSy three examples 
taken at Holgate ; Dircvlotus parvidns, one taken at Acomb Wood ; Phoeo- 
genes stimulator and P. fulvitarsus, found by beating, Acomb Wood ; 
Cryptus erythropus, (J. pavviduSy and C. duhius, these three species bred 
from Emphytus cinct.ts. C. duhius (Tusch) is new to Britain. Phygadenon 
vagabundvs, found at Holgate ; P. ovivcntris, bred from E. cinctvs ; Hemi- 
teleB areator ^ found at Holgate ; Fl.forwosus, IJ.fragilis, bred from E. cine- 
tvs ; Campoplex erythrogastev ^ beaten out of oak, Acomb VVoed ; Mesoleius 
caligatusy M. rufolatris, and M. napans, found by beating ; M. dnhivtf 
and M. aulicus, bred from E. cinctus ; Bassus ylanus and B. pictus found 
by beating, Holgate ; Limneria virginalis and L, erucatoVy captured in 
Acomb Wood; Perilissus sp., found in wood; Nematopodius ater 
(Brischke), two examples bred from E ci)ictnsy two others captured at 
large ; Trematopygas discolor, found at Holgate (Mr. Bridgman : ^'I believe 
it is this species") ; Lissonota variabilis, captured at Holgate ; Polyblastus 
rivalis, var., found in wood ; Eclytus ornatus, var., one example by 
beating. A few of these have been recorded before for this locality, but, 
having bred these, I record their hosts. The same remarks that have 
been applied to the order Lepidoptera apply to the aculeate portion of 
the Hymenoptera — hardly any to be seen. Of course there are exceptions 
in all the orders, and there are one or two here — Bomhus Incorum and B. 
muscorum, the former of these abundant all the season, the latter very 
common in the autumn. There is also one apparently new to th© county, 
Andrena Trimmerana. I took two examples of this in this neighbourhood 
flying in hedge bottoms ; also Andrena sp. which remains unnamed. ISirex 
juvencus.—On Sept. 11th, whilst I was passing along one of the paths in the 



110 



The Naturalist. 



York Nurseries, I picked off the ground a very fine female example of this 
species. It had evidently not been there long, as it was in very fresh 
condition. There is no record of this siricid from the York neighbour- 
hood since 1875 ; this is therefore the more remarkable, since the last 
notice of it was a notice of it taken flying on the top of York Minster 
(see Transactions of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, Parts I. & II.) 
Odynerus pictus. — I discovered two or three colonies of this insect during 
the past summer making their earthen cells on some hard glass lights. 
They formed them on the glass, and, curiously enough, I was able to see 
the larvae in the interior as they progressed from the egg to maturity. 
The cells were filled by the parents with sawfly larvae, and fastened up. 
Here is a wonderful instance of forethought or sagacity : the parent 
knows exactly what size to build the cell so as to contain sufl&cient food 
for its larva. — T. Wilson, Holgate, York, Jan. 16th, 1883. 

OBITUARY. — Jas. Yarley. — Another representative of the old school 
of working naturalists passed away on Sunday, Jan. 7th, in the person of 
James Yarley. Born May 3rd, 1817, at Primrose Hill, Huddersfield, he 
lived for sixty-four years within a comparatively short distance of the same 
spot. His taste for Natural History was evidently early developed, for 
he was, I believe, one of the founders of the Huddersfield Naturalists^ 
Society, which is now perhaps the oldest provincial society of the kind in 
the United Kingdom ; and thirty years ago his name appears to have been 
a household word with the naturalists of the West Riding, whilst he was 
also well known as a successful collector by the leading lepidopterists of 
the country. My own almost earliest lessons in the science were received 
from him, and I well remember the fear and trembling with which, as a 
small schoolboy, I used to take my specimens to him to name, and the 
joy and excitement I felt when, on one of my earliest visits, he presented 
me with my first half-dozen larvae of Satimiia carpini. In the year 1864 
he somewhat excited the entomological world by rearing from a very large 
quantity of larvae a good series of the deep black-bordered variety of 
Abraxas grossnlariata, which, although repeatedly bred in Yorkshire 
since, up to that time appears to have been quite unknown. The form 
at present very properly bears his name — variety Varleyata. Besides 
entomology, he took equal interest in ornithology, and of both lepidoptera 
and birds he formed extensive and rich collections. His health failing, 
and becoming reduced in circumstances, he sold the former, several years 
ago, to Mr. Bennett, of Bradford, but his fine collection of birds was, I 
think, still in his possession at the time of his death. Of late years he 
has been unable to do as active work in his favourite pursuits as formerly, 
but his numerous notes and his papers in this journal will be evidence to 
our readers of the keen interest he still took in all matters pertaining to 
them. He was twice president of the Huddersfield Naturalists' Society— 
the last time during the year 1880. Mr. S. L. Mosley, Beaumont Park, 
near Huddersfield, intends writing a sketch of Mr. Yarley's Hfe, and will 



Reports of Societies. 



Ill 



be glad of any anecdotes or other suitable information from any of his 
correspondents and friends. — ^G. T. P. 

lUfiods of Soctefos- 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society.— Meeting Dec. ] 9th, Dr. Lancaster 
in the chair.-— A very interesting paper v^as read by Mr, R. Oreighton, 
on the Trochilidge, or ^' Humming Birds," many choice specimens of 
skills of these minute and brilliant birds being exhibited by him, and 
their range from the sonthern to the northern parts of the American 
continent described. 

Annual Meeting, Jan. 19th. — Mr. T. Lister was elected president, and 
Mr. W. E. Brady hon. sec. But little progress was reported in entomology 
and botany. In ornithology some particulars were given of the effect 
on birds before and after the snow-storm of Dec. 6th, and the intense 
frost of the 12th. Birds were rendered tame by the cold and starvation, 
and some were found dead. Starlings, bullfinches, blue tits, blackbirds, 
and even jays, came about houses and garden-sheds in the town and 
villages. The Rev. J. Johnson writes of a flock of golden plovers near the 
Vicarage, Denby. After the melting of the snow, daws, rooks, meadow 
pipits, grey and pied wagtails, and redpolls stirred about in the fields in 
quest of food. A few have cheered us with their song — as missel thrush 
Dec. 3rd ; thrush Jan. 3rd ; blackbird, 4th. — T. L. 

Beverley Field Naturalists' and Scientific Society. — Meeting 
11th January. A resolution was passed to make application to the 
Gilchrist Trustees for their series of lectures to be held in Beverley 
during the next winter session. Mr. H. M. Ellis presented a number of 
coal-measure fossils to the society, and Mr. Swailes, on behalf of Mr. 0. 
Dixon, exhibited a fine specimen of the waxwing, shot recently in Pig- 
hill-lane. Mr. R.Cherry showed the following lepidoptera : — Tephrosia 
crepuscularia, Agriopis aprilina, Am,phidasis hetularia and its black 
variety, Chcerocampa elpenor, and Grammsia frilinea. Mr. F. Boyes 
reported that a specimen of the hooper, or whistling swan {Cygnv.s fcrus) 
had been shot near Beverley on the 22nd ult., and also that a bittern and 
several goosanders {Mergus merganser) had been seen in the neighbour- 
hood. After the specimens had been duly examined, a highly interesting 
and instructive lecMire on the Transit <f Venus" was given by Mr. 
J. A. Ridgway, F. ll.A.S,, who illustrated his remarks with diagrams 
and models showing the means employed to measure the distance of the 
sun and planets from the earth. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Jan. 9th, the president, 
Mr. J. W. Carter, in the chair. — Mr. Saville exhibited a specimen of 
Trichomanes radicans ; Mr. West, a number of mosses from Malham and 
Gordale. The president gave his inaugural address on The Orders of 
Insects," and briefly reviewed the different systems of classification that 
have from time to time been propounded, and explained the different 



112 



The Natl^altst. 



orders according to the Ci'tMrinn system, in a very lucid and interesting' 
manner. The lecture was fully illustrated with examples of each, and 
also by diagrams. — H. L. Oxley. 

Manchester Oryptogamtc Society. — Annual Meeting, the president, 
Dr. Carrington, in the chair.-— The hon. secretary read the annual report, 
which briefly enumerated the various discoveries made by the members 
during the last year, and the new localities recorded for the rarer species. 
It was remarked that the exhibitions and distribution of the rarer species 
of cryptogams had been a pleasing feature in the society's proceedings. 
The thanks of the society were accorded to Mr. Chas. Bailey for a copy of 
his recent i)aper on the Structure of the Characeae," to Dr. Braithwaite 
for a copy of the last published part of his British Moss Flora," and to 
the Royal Microscopical Society for their journals, reports, and pro- 
ceedings. Dr. Carrington was re-elected president, Capt. P. G. Cunliffe 
and Mr. W. H. Pearson were elected vice-presidents, and Mr. F. Rogers 
hon. secretary. After the election of various other officers of the society, 
the hon. sec. made some observations on specimens of Pottia cavifolia 
which ha£ been sent from Llandudno, and he exhibited specimens of its 
variety camna from the Continent, which Dr. Wood thought might possibly 
be found in Britain, if attention were paid to the genus. The interesting 
Continental moss Pharomitrinm snhsessile was exhibited ; the specimen 
had been gathered by Prof. Schimper in Styria, and was interesting on 
account of its representing a well marked out division of the genus Pottia. 
It is, however, not yet known as a British moss. Mr. Atkinson exhibited 
specimens of Pezziza aurantia, which he had seen growing in large beds 
near Bowness in September last. The partally dried specimens smelled 
faintly, like dried rose petals. 

Meeting, January, 1883, Capt. Cunliffe, F.R.M.S., in the chair.— Mr. 
J. Cash exhibited a fruiting specimen of Lencohrynw, glmicum, var. minus, 
gathered near Lyndhurst, New Forest. Mr. Geo. Stabler sent a specimen 
of Schistostega osmundacea which had been gathered on Dec. 30th, 1882, 
in the caves of Bis Parlis, Penrith, Cumberland, by Mr. Martindale, 
the moss not having been hitherto recorded for this province. Mr. 
W. H. Pearson brought before the notice of the society the discovery of 
a new British hepatic, Cephalozia Jackii (Limpricht), which Dr. Spruce 
had detected in specimens of Junq. hyssacea, collected by Mr. W. Wilson 
in Cheshire, near Warrington, April, 1841. The species does not appear 
in the recently published memoir on CepJmlozia by Dr. Spruce. Captain 
Cunliffe exhibited a fine series of recently collected mosses, Didynuxloro 
cylindricus and Campylostelinm saxicola, being abundantly in fruit. Dr. 
J. B. Wood sent fruiting specimens of E'^irhyyichium circimiatum, collected 
in Italy by the Marquis Bottini, and a new European moss {Bypniim 
Bottinii (Breidler) discovered by the Marquis Bottini in Etruria, May, 
1881. M. Robert du Buysson, Brout-Vernet, France, was elected a 
corresponding member of the society. 



COLEOPTERA OF THE LIVERPOOL DISTRICT. 
Part IIL 

By John W. Ellis, L.R.C.P., L.R.C.S., Ed., 

HON, SEC. LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY. 

Read before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society^ 
Nimmher 21th, 1882. 

In continuation of my previous papers on the Coleoptera of the 
Liverpool District, I purpose this evening bringing before your 
notice the additions which have been made during the past year, to 
the species and localities of Adephaga, which are contained in Parts 
I. and II. ; and then enumerating the species of the small group 
Palpicornes or Philhydrida, which I know to have occurred in our 
district, leaving the extensive group of Brachelytra to the considera- 
tion of another paper, wholly to be devoted to that group. 

The long continuance of wet w^eather during the past year, has been 
very unfavourable for beetle collecting ; but through the observations 
and work of Messrs. Kinder, May, Smcdley, and Wilding, in addition 
to the attention I have myself given to them during the year, I am 
able to add in addition to new localities for many species of Geode- 
phaga and Hydradephaga, no fewer than seven species of the former, 
and eight of the latter, to our local list. In addition to the informa- 
tion derived from the above-named gentlemen, I have to acknowledge 
an interesting communication on Parts I. and II. from Mr. Joseph 
Chappell, of Manchester, one of our honorary members. 

The species of Adephaga, now recorded for the first time, are as 
follows : — Notiophilus -i-punctatus, Dj.; Dromius ni/riventris, Th.; 
Pterostichus diligens^ Sturm. ; Harpalus serripes, Sch. ; Bradycellus 
distinctus, Dj.; Bemhidium nigricorne, Gyll.; B. flammidatum, Clair.; 
J] aliplusJlavicoUis J ^tmm,; H fluviatiiis^ Aube.; Hydropoms picipes, 
F.; H. nigrita^ F.; U. angastatus, Sturm.; Golymhetes exoletus, Forst.; 
A(jabus paludosus, F.; and Gi/rinus distindus, Aube. 

GEODEPHAGA. 

NOTIOPHILUS. 

N. 4-punctatus, Dj. Mr. Wilding has taken two specimens of this 

questionable species at Derby, one of which is higuttatus on one 

side and \-])unctatiis on the other, bearing out Mr. Crotch's view 

that these are only varieties of the same species. (See a paper by 

the Rev. W. W. Fowler, in the Ent. Monthly Magazine for Nov., 

1882, on Additions, &c., to the Coleoptera.) 
N.S., Vol. viii.. Mar., 1883. 



114 



TiiM Naturalist. 



N. siihsh'iaius, VV at. Under seaweed below Leasowe enil^aiikmeiit, in 
April. (J. Chappell.) 

ELAPHRUS. 

E. citpreus, Duft. Mr. SmedL y and mjself took tKis species abund- 
antly in March, among rejectamenta on the banks of one of the 
lakes" on the sandliills at Wallasey. 

DYSCHIRIUS. 

Z). impunctipeyinis, Daws. Wallasey sandhills. (J. Chappell, in Utt) 
D. glohoms, Hbst, was exceedingly abundant with cupreus in March, 
and on the Hightown shore in May last. 

DROMIUS. 

D. nigrkentrls, Th. {fascia tm, Dj. ) I discovered this species on 
Bidston Hill, under heath (among the dead leaves), in February 
last; Mr. Smedley took it in similar situations at Thurstaston, in 
March. 

ANCHOMENUS. 

A. viduiis^ Pz. Several specimens at Moreton. (J.H.S.'") 

A. fnlig'mosus, Pz. A few specimens in a quarry near Ince Blundell, 

in May last. (J.W.E ) 
A, puellus^ Dj. Mr. R. Wilding was fortunate enough to capture a 

specimen of this species at West Derby, a few weeks since. 

PTEROSTICHUS. 

P. (Jlllfjens^ Sturm {^irenvuf^^ Daws). Thurstaston, (J.H.S., A.H. 
May) ; Hightown shore, in May. (J.W.E.) 

AMARA. 

A, acuminata^ Pk. A single specimen on the railway bank at West 
Derby. (R. Wilding.) 

HARPALUS. 

li. sen ipes, Sch. A single specimen on the Wallasey Sandhills, in 
March last. (J.W.E.) 

BRADYCELLUS. 

B. didlrictus, Dj. Mr. Smediey took this species commonly among 
rushes, at the edge of a pit near Liscard, in May last. I took a 
single specimen at Bromborough, about the same time. 

CILLENUS 

C lateralis^ Sam , was very abundant on the clayey mud at the mouth 
of the river Alt, in May. 

BEMBIDIUM. 

B. bigutiatum, F. Common at Hightown, May. 

B. nigricorne^ Gyll. Mr. May has added this species to our list, he 
having taken several specimens on Bidston Marsh last December. 



* The initials J.H.S./F.K., and J.W.E. refer to Messrs. J. H. Smedley, 
F. Kinder, and myself, respectively. 



Ellis : Coleoptera of LivPrpool District. 



115 



B, bipuncfatum, L., was common with higattaiam^ at Hightown s^mong 
rejectamenta. 

B, StepJiensiy Crotch. In addition to the locality already recorded for 
this species, Mr. Wilding has taken it several times around West 
Derby, and Mr. Smedley took one recently near Spital. 

B. concinnum, Steph. Very abundant at Hightown in May, on the 
banks of the Alt. 

B. Jlammulatum, Clair. Mr. Smedley took two specimens, and I 
myself one, of this beautiful species under rejectamenta, on the 
shore at Hightown, in May last. 

HYDRADEPHAGA. 
Mr. Kinder has taken the following species, in a pit in the neigh- 
bourhood of Westminster Hoad, Kirkdale. 

The following have occurred in considerable numbers : — 
Halipius obliquus, F. Hydroporus retlculatus^ F. 

confinis, Steph. plot us, F. 

„ fulvus, F. septentrionallsy Gyll. 

„ jiavicollu^ Stu. lineatas, F\ 

The foUowuig have occurred in fewer numbers : — 
hJallplas Jliivlalu[>3^ Aube. Moderately common. 
llgdroponis picipes, F. Three specimens. 
„ asalmilis^ Pk. Four specimens. 
,, memnoniuSy Nic. ^ 

„ nigrita, F. Moderately common. 

,, angustatuSj Stu. j 
In additicm to the above I have to record : — 
Halipius fidvusj F. A single specimen on the Hightown shore. 
(J.W.E.) 

Hydroporus nigrita, F. Common in a pit on the Sandhills near 

Hall-road Station. 
Noterus sparsus, Marsh. Common in a pit near Wallasey, April. 

(J.W.E.) 

Colymheies exoldus, Forst. I picked up a dead specimen of this 
species, which is new to the district, on the bank of the Alt, near 
Hightown, in May last. 

Agahus paludosusy F. Mr. Kinder has a specimen of this handsome 
species, taken by himself in the district, he believes at Crosby. 

Gyrimis distinctus, Aube. Mr. Chappell informs me he has taken this 
species in pools at Leasowe, in April. 



The Naturalist. 



PALPICORNIA. 

Of this small group of beetles, which has had little attention paid 
to it, I ana able to enumerate about 43 species as having occurred in 
our district. Of the genus HelopJiorus alone I have to record 10 out 
of the 12 species given as British in Dr. Sharp's last catalogue ; and 
of the puzzling genus Cercyon I give a list of 14 out of the 18 
British species. 

HYDROBIUS. 

H . Jmcipes, L. Abundant in pits. A smaller variety with paler 
legs occurs on the Sandhills. 

PHILHYDEUS. 

p. testaceiis, F. Common in pits, Westminster Road. (F.K.) 
P. melanocepJinlus, 01. A single specimen from the same locality. 
(F.K.) 

ENOCHRUS. 

E, bicolor^ Pk. A single specimen with the above. (,F.K.) 

ANAC^NA. 

A. limhata^ F. Common in pits. 

A, variabilis, Sharp. Not so common as the preceding. 

LACCOBIUS. 

L. mimtus, L. In the Fender, Bidston Marsh. (A. H. May.) 
L. ulgriceps, Th. I have a single specimen, taken on the Wallasey 
sandhills, in April, 1876. 

EEROSUS. 

-B. affinis^ Brulle. I used to take this species frequently in claypits 
behind Wavertree Park ; Mr. Kinder takes it sparingly about 
Westminster-road. 

LIMNOBIUS. 

Z. triuicaielluSy Th. Crosby, September. (F. Archer's diary.) 

HELOPHORUS. 

//. rufjoms, 01. On the shore at Crosby. (F. K.) 

mbilis, F. Bidston Marsh, in November, 1862. (Mr. Archer's 
diary.) 

E. intermedins, Muls. Crosby, September, do. 
JL aquaticits, L. Abundant in pits. 

//. Mulsanti, Bye. One specimen from the Hightown shore, May, 

1882. (J. W. E.) 
H. griseas, Hbst. Common. 

H. (jrayiularis, L. Conmion, especially near the sandhills. 
H. ceueipenrds, Th. Altcar rifle ground. (F. Archer's diary.) 
H. arvernicus, Mula. I have a single specimen, taken along with 
gra nutans. (J. W. E.) 



Ellis : Coleoptera of the Liverpool District. 



117 



H. dorsalls, Marsh. Altcar rifle ground. (Mr. Archer's diary.) 

HYDROCHUS. 

H. angudatus. Germ. Mr. Kinder takes this species commonly in 
pits near Westminster-road. 

OCTHEBIUS. 

0. h'tcolor. Germ. Two specimens from the Fender, Bidston Marsh. 
(J. W. E.) 

0. rvfimarginatm, Steph. Several specimens amonof rejectamenta on 
the banks of the Fender, in October last. (J. W. E.) 
cyclonotum. 

C. orbiciilare^ F. Abundant at the edge of a pit at Liscard, last 
April. (J. W. E.) 

SPH(ERIDIUM. 

L. scaraboeoides^ L. Common in dung. 
A\ bipudidatam^ F. With the above, but less common. 
marginatum^ F. Taken with the above. (F. K) 

CERCYON. 

0, obsoletus^ Gyll. Common in dung on the sandhills. 

C. hamorrhous^ Gryll. A S'ngle specimen, loc. ? (J. W. E.) 

0. aquaticus, Muls. Moderately common about Kirkdale. 

C.flavipes, F. The most abundani^. of the genus with us. (F. K.) 

C. IntnaliH. Marsh. A few specimens on the sandhills (J. W. E.) 

Moderately common about Kirkdale. (F. K.) 
C littoralis^ Gyll. Common under rejectamenta on the shore. 
C. depresms, Steph. One specimen from Aigburth, and one specimen 

from Hightown. (J. W. E.) 
C. miipunctatuH^ L. Common in dung. 
C, quisquitius, L. Common. 
C. melanocephalm, L. Abundant. 

G. termivatus, Marsh. One specimen, Wallasey (J. W. E.) Common 

at Litherland (F. K.) 
C, pygnicBus^ III. Two specimens from Hightown (J. W. E.) 
C. lugnbris, Pk. One specimen from Hightown (J. W. E.) 
C. amUa, Pk. Common. 

megasternum. 
J/, boletophagum^ Marsh. Common in dung. 

cryptopleurum. 

C. atomarium^ F. Common about Litherland (F. K.) Two specimens 
from Eastham J. W. E.) 

In conclusion, I would call attention to the valuable results which 
may be achieved by systematically working one locality ; as an 
instance of which, Hthe number of s[)ecies (many not hitherto recorded 



118 



The Naturalist. 



from the district) taken by Mr. F. Kinder in tlie fields near West- 
niiuster-road, only a short distance from the city boundary, and a 
locality which we would probably think as unproductive of good 
species of insects as any locality could well be. 



A WORKING MAN BOTANIST. 

[A correspondent sends us the following notice, and although our 
friend Mr. Whitehead is still living, and we trust will live for many 
years to continue his useful work, we make no apology for publishing 
it.— Ed. Nat.'] 

^' Mr. John Whitehead, of Ashton, has been a diligent student of 
botany for upwards of thirty years, but during the greater portion of 
that time he has devoted himself more especially to the study of 
mosses. As a boy his scanty pocket money was expended in the 
purchase of botanical works, and his spare lime after work hours was 
then, and is now, given to botanical rambles and researches. In the 
first year that he began the study of mosses, in 1859, he was tortu- 
nate enough to make two important discoveries, viz., Dicranella 
ScJireberi, var, elata, Schimper, found in Stirrup Wood, Charles worth, 
and AtricJium crispum, Staley Brushes, which was said by the late 
Professor Schimper, of Strasburg, to be a very interesting addition 
to the flora of Europe. The late Mr. John Nowell had known this 
moss for some time, but failed to get it determined. The following 
may also be mentioned : — Heterocladium lieUroptarmn, found near 
Bolton (18G3), in company with his friend, Mr. R. Scholefield, the 
first and only locality in England where this moss has been seen 
with fruit; Hedwigia ciliata^ var. striata, Wilson, near Grasmere 
(1867), the first locality in England, and only found hitherto in t\NO 
places in the world ; Btixbaumia apliylla^ Tintwistle (1807), an addi- 
tion to the Manchester flora, and hitherto known only in two 
localities in England ; liliyncliodegvm. depremim^ Marple (18G7), the 
third station in Britain ; Seligerta trkticJia, near Castleton, Derby- 
shire (18G8), the first locality in Britain ; Plagiothedum Borrerlaniun, 
Arthog (1876), hitherto called by some of the principal writers on 
mosses, Hypnum elegam ; but by cultivating this plant, under favour- 
able conditions, for three months, Mr. Whitehead was able to show 
that it had been incorrectly named by all authorities except Dr. 
Spruce in 1846, when the moss was new to science; StUgeria acuti- 
folia^ Arncliffe, Yorkshire (1868), new to Britain ; Brynm rufum^ near 
Litton, Yorkshire (187!)), new to science ; Car ex oruithopoda (a sedge;, 



A Working Man Botanist. 



now to Britain, found in Miller's Dale (1874), by Mr. H. Newton, 
and tirst named by Mr. Whitehead ; Javgm/iamda Nevlce?tsis (a liver- 
wort), Ben Nevis (1S7G), new to science. 

Among Mr. Whitehead's numerous correspondents are Dr. Spruce, 
the late Mr. William Wilson, author of the " Bryologia Britannica," 
Professor Babington, Sir Jose})h Hooker, Professor Balfour, Mr. H. 
0. W^atson, and Professor Schimper, of Strasburg. In his Synopsis 
of European mosses, Schimper refers to Mr. Whitehead as ^'sharp- 
eyed,'' and they were introduced to each other when the Professor 
visited this country in 1865. Dr. Braithwaite published in 1877 a 
work on Sphagnums (bog mosses) with dried specimens, those for the 
counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Derbyshire being collected and 
prepared by Mr. Whitehead ; and he is contributing to the same 
gentleman's superbly illustrated British Moss Flora," now in 
course of publication. He is also pi'oviding specimens for a new 
edition of Wilson's ^' Bryologia Biitannica," which is being brought 
out by the Rev. J. Fergusson, of Bjechin. In addition he is pre- 
paring a moss flora for North Derbyshire, and another for a circuit 
of ten miles round Ash ton. 

Mr. Whitehead was one of the founders and first president of the 
Manchester Cryptogamic Society, is now the president of the Ashton 
Linnaean Society, and the United F^ield Naturalists, and the Ashton 
Biological Societies number him among their vice-presidents. He 
possesses a small bat valuable library of scientific works, his herba- 
rium is probably unequalled for variety and completeness, and he is 
a not infrequent contributor to our botanical journals. It will be 
seen that Mr. Whitehead has done good work in the cause of science, 
of which he is an enthusiastic lover, and his chief characteristics are 
untiring energy, modesty, and a willingness to impart his knowledge 
to others." 



NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 

( Continued.) 
By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

Again, we might excusably imagine that when daylight was exposed 
on the raising of a stone, beetles would immediately, without premedi- 
tation, rush away in all directions. My own experience points to an 
opposite re-ult. They wait for the word of command, when one signal 
trumpet annihilates the colony. Insects mai/ give expression to their 
atfections by means of audible (or inaudible to human ears) specific 



120 



TriE Naturalist. 



calls, and who has proved that they are inaccessible to feelings of 
friendly interest or Good Samaritanship 1 Darwin has exposed 
marvels of biological research. He elevates the poor earth-worm to a 
platform of usefulness. Lubbock, unconsciously perhaps but never- 
theless powerfully, proclaims the sovereignty of fragile ants, and the 
more we learn, not the less do we exhibit our insufficiency of wisdom. 
Study the domestic economy and life-history of our insects as we will, 
the time is yet far distant for the revelation of structural, susceptible 
and expressible utility. In this respect effect is fact, but cause, 
theory. Adverting to the stone turning once more, I have always 
understood that species of the genera Chrysomela and Cassida were 
Phytophagous insects. There is a lovely Chrysomela not uncommonly 
taken here tinder stones, quite dormant, and where one occurs I 
generally find companions. The regular hunting ground for this 
insect is some distance from the food-plant. Cassida atrata (a noble 
fellow) I have never captured in any other situation. I should like to 
hear if any of my home friends can enlighten me as to the reason. 
When once we recognise the food-plant of a Cassida^ we are tolerably 
sure wherever it is growing to find thereupon our desired acquaint- 
ance. In this respect the genus is exceptional. Thus, C. Tigrina 
(Olivier) feeds on a species of Solanum. I have seen the plant in a 
dozen localities widely separate, and no matter whether it is commonly 
distributed or isolated the beautiful and auriferous-spotted Tigrina in 
larval stage with excrementitious tail, or the perfect insect is almost 
a certain accompaniment. I have well nigh exhausted my premier list 
of beetles, always excepting the dozens of species whose names are un- 
known to me. Professor Westwood, that most urbane friend of the 
antipodean ColeopLerist, is rendering every assistance in the naming 
process, and I may have to speak further on subsequent finds at some 
future date. My companion in nearly every love-labour is Mr. Sloman 
Rous, a most zealous and painstaking naturalist of the 18 carat stamp. 
He has the finest private collection of beetles in South Africa, and 
duly considering vast and insuperable difficulties of identification, I 
am bound to acknowledge that few men approach him in point of 
general knowledge on the entire group. As we are constantly 
together, comparing notes and hunting Entomons, I am tolerably safe 
to pilfer (?) his opinion in many things, unconsciously stating it as 
original. He will pardon the locm. 

In the arrangement of his cabinet he is a stickler for two subsidiary 
articles. The first, corrosive sublimate, as a preservative against 
Acari and beetle pests, requires no comment ; but the second is so 



Bairstow: Natural History Notes — South Africa. 121 



palpably " good " that I recommend it strongly to cabinet-makers and 
collectors. Instead of cork for lining cases, he adopts the pith of the 
American aloe. This is cut into long strips of the required thickness, 
and being lighter and more impressible than cork, is, I think, infinitely 
superior. I noticed also that the names of specimens were neatly 
written on cardboard of different shades, thus : Dark-red... class ; rose 
colour... genus ; pink... species. No wonder that relations of pinned 
and defunct beetles are happy when the latter are immortalised in gems 
of caligraphy inscribed on artistic and appropriate tablets. 

As a back-form student in botany, I naturally remark the prickly 
appearance of the majority of African bushes. As an ardent sports- 
man I naturally feel the quality and power of the prickles. These 
attain to all sizes from one line to om^ foot long, assuming the most 
grotesque shapes imaginable. 

A good old lady who resides peaceably in the sanctity of an un- 
sanctified canteen (celebrated for miles around as a fishing-tackle 
depository) owns a small museum of local prodigies. Let us take a 
seat at her supper table. We don't require a bill of fare after the 
fashion of " Three in Norway." Stout and oysters, nothing more, 
(I hear you exclaim, " Quite enough too !''). As edible molluscs 
rapidly slip away from view, Mother B. entertains her guests, while 
exhibiting treasured curios one by one in a most affable manner. 
Here are four fine specimens of Paper Nautilus, taken on the adjacent 
beach ; also a couple of huge Tritons, and hosts of smaller shells. 
" This," she remarks — perceiving our attention fixed upon a black 
billiard ball, only more so, — "was cut out of the paunch of an ox, 
and is composed of hair soldered together by constant licking and 
salivary manipulation.* And now," says she, " I think I shall puzzle 
you. Can you name these for me ? ' Buckhoras ! " stammers a 
neighbour. I, remembering the old truism, ^' where ignorance is 
bliss," &c., assume a violent cough and say nothing. We "give the 
riddle up," and the old lady inwardly chuckles and outwardly heaves, 
as she answers, " a pair of Mimosa Thorns." A better substitute for 
buck-horns I have never sean, and placed over the door of a gentle 
man's hall these spikes could perplex a sportsman of keen discern- 
ment. I have jotted down a few examples of shape, which will convey 
a vague idea of the numerous enemies and demoniacal obstacles a 
collector's pants or gauze net contends with in a South African bush. 
The originals were all gathered from one small bush. Some of the 

* The largest specimen I have ever seen. 



122 



The Naturalist. 



withered and sapless thorns are appropriated by small ants. Splitting 
one down the centre, I am tolerably safe to find the hollowed space 
inhabited, but am not equally certain as to where the place or places 
of ingress and egress are bored. 

(To he continued.. 



ScHcomyia horealis. — I would call the attention of your readers to this 
very conspicuous and interesting fly, of whose life-history so very little is 
known. It is one of the largest and handsomest of the hover flies 
Syrphidce ; the antennae are plumose, and the body marked with bands 
alternatety yellow and piceous. It seems for the most part to frequent 
the hilly districts of England and Scotland, being more especially fond of 
the hill tops. It is chiefly remarkable for its curious habit of making a 
harmonious piping sound while sitting on the stones apparently at re^t ; 
the sound has been mistaken for singing at a distance. It is also said to 
cause some annoyance to visitors to the hill-tops by flying towards them 
in a threatening manner, but this requires corroboration. It will be 
observed that Mr. J. C. Dale suggests that this may be the insect referred 
to by Hay as having been met with near Settle, and proving very 
annoying {Nat., Jan:, 1883, p. 93). To anyone interested in the subject 
I would suggest a reference to the notices in the E7it. Month. Mag., Dec, 
1881, p. 159, and Jan., 1883, p. 188, and the very interesting letters of 
Mr. Swinton and Mr. Hellins in the same publication, Jan., 1882, p. 
189. I should be very glad to hear of fresh observations on these and 
other points in the life-history of this insect. Sericomyia horealis is a 
stout-bodied fly about the size of the large Valucella, which are parasites 
on the humble bee, and so curiously mimic them. — E. N. Blomfield, 
Guestling Rectory, Feb. 17th, 1883. 

A World in Miniature. — Through the kindness of Mr. Loran, smack 
owner, of Hull, I had forwarded to me, a few days ago, a specimen " 
from the North Sea ; it consists of a female edible crab. Cancer paguvns, 
unfortunately deceased in transit, and measurin^^ about Sin. across the 
carapace. On the back were eleven oysters, Ostrea edulis, the largest 
about Sin. by 2in.. twenty or thirty Jnomia ephippium ^nd its y-driety 
acnlcata, several Saxicava rvgosa, and three or four Ascidians. On the 
upp^r valves of the oysters were numerous Serpulse, /S'. triguetra, 
annelides forming sand tubes, patches of polyzoa and egg capsules 
of one of the whelks. In the interstices of the shells were four 
medium-sized and several minute specimens of the plumose anemone, 
A. dianthnsy the largest of which was furnished with two distinct mouths. 
The large claws were furnished with a forest of Sertularian and Tubularian 
zoophytes, and the pedipalps were infested with what appeared to be a 



Short Notes and Queries. 



123 



spec ^ of sponge. On breaking the mass up into suitable pieces for my 

aqu am, I also found three small crabs of another species, not yet 

dete ined. I have handed over the refuse sand, &c., to a friendly 

micr 3opist for examination. Unfortunately many of the animals had 

died 3m exposure to the air ; had it been otherwise, the whole would 

havfc rmed a splendid object for a large tank.— J. D. Butterell, 2, St. 

John -,reet, Beverley, Feb. 11th, 1883. 

Ba er in Cleveland. — A fine male badger was caught a few days ago 

near ; river Lees, by Mr. Thomas Braithwaite of Red Hall Farm, near 

Yarni The weight of it is about 25ft)s. — W. Gregson, Baldersby, 

Thin January 29 th, 1883. 

SCi .^iTY OF Winter Birds. — Referring to the letter in the January 
No. oi he Naturalist upon the scarcity of birds, both residents and winter 
visito: at the present time, I can fully confirm the writer's remarks 
respec ig many species. We have very few fieldfares or redwings this 
wintei I myself have seen none, but hear of one or two small flocks 
having been noticed by other persons. The absence of woodcocks has 
been a reat disappointment to the majority of sportsmen. Covers from 
which me of these birds have been invariably killed in former years, 
have b n entirely blank this winter, and I have only heard of one or two 
having 3n shot in the neighbourhood in the month of October. The 
first bi observed was shot on the 16th of that month. Not a single 
short-' 1 owl has been recoi-ded, though a few generally accompany?' 
the wo )cks here. Hooded crows are of much more frequent occur- 
rence t I formerly — in fact they are becoming abundant in this locality. 
Since C 25th, when I first saw one, very few days have passed without 
my hea: g their harsh croak . The first flock of siskins appeared on the 
28th o1 3tober, and these birds, as well as gold-crests, were abundant 
from th date until about Christmas, when they left us. Soine large 
flocks ot aow buntings made their appearance about Nov. 25th, on the 
higher ci ivated land a few miles from here. Snipe and jack-snipe have 
not beeij early so numerous as in previous winters. The first jack-snipe 
seen wai ot on the 11th December. During the last week or two a few 
magpies ve come down to us from the hillside plantations, which does 
not often xur. The peewits have never left us, although they usually 
do so ; a , about the commencement of this year, a large flock of golden 
plovers, . csisting of several hundreds, paid us a visit for a few days. 
Starlings )ng-thrushes, blackbirds, and wrens sufl'ered severely during 
the three nsecutive hard winters of 1878-79-80. but the two latter are 
again inc sing — much more so than the two former. Song-thrushes 
have been itirely absent this winter, but a few made their appearance 
about the 1 inst. Bullfinches have been unusually plentiful ; skylarks 
have been carce, but began to re-appear the first week of this month 
(Februar;«^ ^ Titlarks were fairly numerous in December, but they have 



124 



The Naturalist. 



now left us for their favourite locality — the moors. Considering that we 
have had no prolonged severe weather, the average number of wild fowl 
has visited us, among them being a flock of eight wild swans, and a single 
specimen of the red-breasted Merganser. On the 3rd of January a great 
grey shrike was shot here, being the second bird of this species which has 
been killed in this neighbourhood within the last few years. Another 
specimen was seen during the last week in January. Unless we have an 
exceptionally severe winter the wood-pigeons quit this immediate locality 
for districts where large woods give them shelter close to an abundance of 
food, such as turnips. This is the case now, but farmers within a few 
miles say they have far too many of these birds. I think the stockdoves 
accompany the wood-pigeons in these local movements, both birds 
re-appearing here on the return of spring. We have about the same 
number of tree sparrows as in former years, and I may say the same of 
chafiinches, greenfinches (one of our commonest species), yellowhammers, 
tits, hedge-sparrows, and robins. I observed a pied wagtail on the 4th 
instant, the tirst I have seen for many weeks. To sum up, we do not 
appear to have anything like the scarcity of birds here, which prevails 
near Lofthouse, and the diminution in numbers chiefly applies to our 
winter visitors. — Thos. Carter, Burton House, Masham, Feb. 12th, 1883. 

Additions to the Wensleydale Shell List. — Since the publication 
of my notes on the shells of Wensleydale, I have been favoured, hj 
friends, with additional information. Another of my boxes has turned 
up, containing specimens picked out of moss brought home from Whit- 
field Gill, near Askrigg. The species are Planorbis albus and P. parvus 
{glaber, Jeff".), neither of which has hitherto been recorded for the dale. 
For the detection of these forms I am indebted to Messrs. Wm. Nelson 
and Jno. W. Taylor. It is from fchem also that I derive information of 
another addition, Fisidium amnicum, a bivalve, which they found at 
Cover Bridge, in 1877. This brings up the tale of fresh-water forms to 
thirteen, and the whole Wensleydale list to fifty-five. My friends have 
also furnished me with notes of additional localities for other species. 
They found Helix sericea and H. pidcheUa near Wensley, and Mr. H. 
Pollard tells me that he has taken various species near Hawes, including 
Helix hortensis, Bulimus obscurus, Pupa nmbilicata, Clausilia rugosa, and 
C. ckibia, as well as others which I have already recorded for that place 
on other authority. - Wm. Denison Roebcjck, Leeds, Feb. 14th, 1883, 

Errata. — We regret that several errors occurred in Mr. T. Wilson's 
paper, on page 109 of our last (February) number. Line 9 from top of 
page 109, should read " larvj^, not requiring so much attention as some 
others. Enpithecia doneata, early in April." Line 16 from top should 
read Inculella^ a very good example. Laverna ochraceella turned up in 
fair numbers." Line 25 from top, Tusch " should read Tasch." Line 
29 from top, ) ii.folafris sliould read rufolabris,'^ and napans'^ 



Rainfall for January. 



125 



should read napaeus'' Line 4 from top of page 110, 1875 " should 
read ^^1835." 

OBITUARY. — Benjamin Cooke. — It is with the deepest regret I 
record the death of my late friend Mr. Benjamin Cooke, of Southport, 
who died suddenly on the 3rd inst. He was born on the 16th September, 
1816, and was the son of Mr. Isaac Cooke, founder of the well-known 
firm of Isaac Cooke & Sons, cotton brokers, Liverpool. From earliest 
childhood he and his brother, Mr. Nicholas Cooke, were remarkable for 
their intense love of insects, astonishing their friends by covering the 
walls of their nursery with moths, butterfles, &c., spread out so as to 
show their beauties to the best advantage. This natural taste very greatly 
developed at the Friends' School, York, where great attention was, and 
is still, paid to the cultivation of a love of Natural History in the scholars. 
Mr. Cooke was not content with studying one order of insects only, but 
was wonderfully acquainted with insect life generally — indeed, unless it 
was Diptera, I do not know to which order he paid the greatest attention. 
His knowledge of species was truly astonishing, as numerous friends can 
testify who have sought his assistance in naming their specimens. You 
will miss, I am sure, a valued correspondent, as the papers from his pen 
you have from time to time published have added much to the interest 
of your useful periodical. — S. J. Capper, Huyton Park, Liverpool, Feb. 
18th, 1883. 



Rainfall hx f amtarg. 





Height 
of 

above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

lieaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Daltoil) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 












Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


8-40 


21 


8-40 


6-05 


28 


2.11 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


3-74 


22 


3-74 


tl-79 


28 


0-745 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


3-98 


24 


3-98 


1:2 -36 


28 


0-58 


Patelet B ridge... (E. War- 
burton, M.R.C.S.. L.S A.) 


436 


4-31 


13 


4-31 


0-26 


29 


1 89 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


3-37 


18 


3-37 


2-46 


28 


0-71 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


6-55 


23 


6-55 


4-19 


28 


1-54 


Went WORTH Castle (do. ) . . . 


520 


4-69 


19 


4-69 


2-90 


28 


0-97 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


2-12 


21 


212 


1-65 


24 


0-46 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


1-92 


19 


1-554 


§1-92 


24 


0-56 



* Average to date for 16 years, 1866-81. f Average of 29 years, 1853-62 k 1865-83. 
J Average of 14 years, 1870-83. 
§ The annual average for 30 years, 1850-79, is 22*347 on 151-15 days. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Feb. 13th. — The repo o 
the Conversazione and Exhibition, Jan. 25th, was favourable, there a» 
a small balance to the credit of the Institute. There is little to repoi as 
to insects and flowers. ' Mercurialis perennis flowered tirst week in 
January ; Tussilaqo farfara, February 1st. Mr. H. Garland, of W( 1- 
hall, reports that he has a fine specimen of the Bohemian wax-w % 
obtained near that place, Dec. 20th ; this, and the Richardson's sk i, 
obtained at Cudworth, Oct. 27th ; the snow-buntings, Dec. 26th ; ; 1 
the Sclavonic grebe, reported by Mr. M. G. Parkin ; are the rai t 
occasional winter visitants to this neighbourhood the present seas- . 
Song-thrushes are decreasing, and need more protecting. The songs I 
birds are increasing daily — skylarks, early in J anuary ; chafiinch, Feb. ; 
yellow-hammer, Feb. 16th. The traces in the snow of an otter wl 
observed at Woodhall, early in J anuary. — Thos. Lister. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Jan. 23rd, the preside] 
in the chair. — Mr. Firth reported taking B. leucophearia, at Saltaire, ai 
also exhibited a beautiful series of H. defoliaria, from Shipley Glen. Tl 
president— a drawer from his cabinet, containing, amongst others, >^ 
ocellatus, S. convolvuti, and D, Galii. Mr. Soppitt named some fern 
gent from Timsbury, Somerset. 

Meeting, Feb. 6th, the president in the chair. — Mr Soppitt exhibitec 
three specimens of Geaster, from Norfolk. Tho president exliibitad 
specimens of the whole of British butterflies belonging* to the order, 
Papilionid{3e, and described their characteristics, and geographical dis- 
tribution. Mr. West — a large number of British and American plants, 
to illustrate the Nat. Ord. Ericacse. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting, 
Jan. 27th, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) in the chair. The officers 
elected for the current session were Mr. S. J. Capper, president ; Mr. 
Robert Brown, vice-president ; and Dr. J. W. Ellis, honorary secretary. 
The president then gave a short address, in which, after thanking the 
members for his re-election, he referred to the entomological work during 
the past season. The past year had been a most prosperous one, 15 new 
members having been elected. He believed this was a greater number 
than in any previous year. Seven members had left through removal 
from Liverpool and other causes, and the society now numbers 67 against 
59 members at the beginning of the year. At the eleven meetings which 
had been held 13 papers had been read, most of which had evinced a 
considerable amount of care, thought, and talent in their preparation. 
The secretary read the annual report for 1882, and the financial statement 
showed a good balance in the bank. Mr. E. E,. Billington read a paj^er 
entitled Fourteen Days in Trinidad," in which he detailed his expe- 
riences, entomological and otherwise, in that charming West Indian 
island, describing very vividly, and occasionally with much humour, its 



Reports of Societies. 



127 



fauna and flora, its scenery, and the character and mode of life of its 
inhabitants. A short discussion terminated the proceedings. 

Leeds Naturalists' Club and Scientific Association. — 500th 
meeting, Feb. 13th. — This was celebrated by a tea and social gathering 
of members, with Messrs. Hobkirk and Porritt present as visitors, at 
Powolny's Rooms, the evening being devoted to a conversazione, at which 
numerous interesting objects were shown. The proceedings after tea 
commenced by the president, Mr. Thomas Fairley, F.R.S.E., giving a 
brief resume of the Club's history. Its double title shows its twofold 
origin, the Naturalists' Chib and the Scientific Association coalescing (in 
1872) by a process of mutual gravitation, after modest beginnings and 
independent co-existence. The subsequent history was that of a gradual 
unfolding, and steady and continued progress. The naturalists have 
usually predominated, but this is simply because they have been more 
numerous and more active than the students of other sciences ; and as 
the society's scope includes the whole range of physical science, it only 
remains for the students of any particular branch to emulate the zeal and 
energy of the naturalists, to secure for their subject its due preponder- 
ance. Speeches were afterwards made by Mr. Jas. Brodie (the parent " 
of the Naturalists' Club proper), Mr. Thomas Hick, B.A., B.Sc, Mr. B. 
Holgate, F.G.S. (ex-presidents), Mr. Wm. Eagle Clarke, and Mr. C. P. 
Hobkirk, F.L.S. The meeting then became an informal and most enjoy- 
able converazsione. The president showed various calculating instru- 
ments, Mr. F. W. Branson, F.C S., an incandescent lamp for micro- 
photography and Mr. B. A. Burrell, F.C.S., a case of silver ores. Mr. 
Clarke showed, for Mr. Edwd. Bidwell of London, a beautiful series of 
instantaneous photographs of bird-life at the Bass Rock and Farne 
Islands. Mr. H. B. Hewetson brought water-colour drawings of birds of 
his own execution, and Mr. Grassham a splendid German book of birds. 
An old work, Natural History" (1645) was shown by Mr. J. T. Beer, 
and models of the internal eye and ear by Mr. Geo. Hainsworth. An 
album of photographs and autographs of Yorkshire naturalists, to which 
various members contributed, was on view. Mr. Edwd. Atkinson, F.L.S., 
showed dried specimens of Linncea horealis, and a collection of the turf- 
mosses was sent by Mr. W. West. A box of rare lepidoptera was shown 
by Mr. G. T. Porritt, F.L.S., and Mr. W. Barwell Turner, F.R.M.S., 
had numerous objects, including original drawings from the microscope 
and a copy of Piaget's Les Pediculines," with photographic plates. 
Microscopic objects were shown by him, by Mr. Fairley, Mr. Emsley and 
Mr. J. W. Dixon. The meeting was altogether a decided success, and 
will probably form the precedent for an annual gathering of similar 
character. — W. D. R. 

Port Elizabeth Naturalists' Society. — Annual meeting. — The 
financial and secretary's reports were adopted, and the following officers 
selected for the ensuing session : — president, R. Hallack, re-elected ; 
vice-president, S. Rous, re-elected ; lion, secretary and treasurer, S. D. 



128 



The Naturalist. 



Bairstow, F. L. S. , re-elected. The report showed good progress, and was 
very satisfactory. Entomology seems to be the favourite science, botany 
ranking second. The following notes of a ramble on New Year's Day 
(midsummer in South Africa), sent by our friend the founder of the 
society, Mr. S. D. Bairstow, will, we venture to think, be read with 
interest : — We have it on good authority that the weather on New 
Year's Day, even from a naturalist's point of view, was all propitious, 
leaving nothing to be desired. Arriving at Sandfontein, our friends, 
after visiting the lovely miniature of a waterfall on Mr. Conrey's farm, 
employed a coloured guide, who led the way across country to the Uiten- 
hage springs. Here they pitched their imaginary tents, and whilst one 

or two dignified officers of the society, viz., Messrs. (hush !) ^* did a 

snooze," the beetle-men prowled about in search of spoil. A magnificent 
longicorn yclept Zoographus oculator innocently ruminating on a sweet- 
scented mimosa blossom, awoke to find himself in Mr. Bairstow's odiously 
odorous prison bottle. Another specimen, similarly situated, soon sniffed 
the benzine breeze dispensed by Mr. Amphlett. The emerald beauty, 
Cetonia aulica, narrowly escaped with its life, but Mr. Bous made sad 
havoc amongst the family of a certain white butterfly (Pieris gidica), and 
Mr. Bead boxed bugs (Hemiptera) ad infinitum. Three species of 
Rednvius were taken on the Ornithogalum. Escort John now receives his 
dismissal, and with it a good sample of golden leaf and cut cavendish, 
and inwardly hopes we may meet again." Although recent rains have 
considerably improved the appearance of bushy regions, the naturalists 
failed to discern any floral novelties, and, according to Mr. Hallack, who 
is conversant with our district botany, the best find of the day was frail 
and fickle Gethyllis spiralis. A pretty specimen of our curious tree-frog 
and several interesting larvae were taken eM route, and the naturalists 
arrived at Uitenhage just in time to be too late for the train. Nothing 
daunted, they visited the farm of Mrs. Stewart, near the railway station, 
in the homestead of which they were hospitably entertained, and in the 
grounds of which some local Coleoptera were captured. The naturalists 
returned to Port Elizabeth by the 7.45 p.m. train, not a bit the worse — 
tanned hides and aching bones always excepted — forspending New Year's 
Day with Dame Nature and her relatives. 

BiPON Scientific Association. — First annual meeting, Feb. 13th. — 
Mr. T. 0. Heslington presided. The secretary, Mr. B. M. Smith, read 
the report, Avhich stated that the club, which was commenced in February 
last, had now 120 members, their object being to establish a museum and 
publish a record of the fauna and flora of the district, from Harrogate on 
the south to Bichmond on the north. The Marquis of Bipon was elected 
president, and Mr. B. M. Smith secretary. It was resolved to accept the 
tenancy of a house in Park-street, at a rental of £23 per annum, for a 
museum, Mr. G. Waite being accepted as a resident curator. Several new 
members were elected. 



©ttjgmal Jl littles. 



ON THE PRESENT STATE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE OF 
THE GEOGRAPHY OF BRITISH PLANTS. 



By J. Gilbert Baker, F.R.S., &c. 

The Annual Address of the President to the Members of the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union, at Selby, on March 3rd, 1883. 

When Professor Williamson and Mr. Denison Roebuck first spoke to 
me at tlie York Meeting of the British Association about undertaking 
to fill for a year the presidental chair of your Union, I felt at first 
very unwilling to accept the responsibility. Greatly interested as I 
have always been in what concerns the Natural History of my native 
county, when I lived in Yorkshire my time was so much taken up 
by business engagements, that in order to collect the material for my 
book on North Yorkshire," T w^as forced to almost entirely neglect 
the two other Ridings, and I left the county for London too soon 
after it was finished to be able to find time for visiting those inter- 
esting tracts in the West and East Ridings that I should have been 
so glad to have had an opportunity of exploring ; and I also felt that, 
since I have lived at Kew, my attention has been so much occupied 
with other kinds of botany, that in anything relating to home-work, I 
had not only not progressed wdth the times, but that I had forgotten 
a great deal of what I knew familiarly twenty years ago. A3 
however, I failed to convince your representatives that these excuses 
were good ones, I accepted their invitation, and beg now to thank you 
heartily for the compliment which it implies. When the time came round 
that I had to select a subject for this present address, I thought I 
could best utilize the occasion by asking you to consider for a while 
what is the present state of our knowledge of the geography of British 
plants, with a view that, in thinking the matter over, our attention 
might be specially drawn to considering what are the grooves in which 
further research may be profitably pushed forward. At the outset 
you will, I think, all be prepared to admit readily the proposition that 
in Natural History, in an eminent degree, the general rule holds good 
that the value of our work, whether as individuals or societies, will 
depend very greatly upon its being carried out upon a methodical 
plan. The facts of Natural History are so infinitely numerous, that if 
a naturalist does not go about his work methodically, he may toil hard 
and long, and yet have very little of any value to show, as the result 
N.S., Vol. viii.. Apr., 1883. 



130 



The Naturalist. 



of all his labour. So long as the facts remain as mere isolated facts, they 
can only interest and be remembered by a limited number of specialists ; 
but when our facts can be made to illustrate general laws, their value 
rises to a higher level, and in Natural History in general, and botanical 
geography in particular, the value of our results will depend very 
greatly upon our attempting to realise for ourselves beforehand, as 
clearly and fully as we can, what it is we want to get to know, and 
then setting to work systematically to collect and arrange the facts that 
elucidate the subject we have selected. 

What I am going to say will all have exclusive reference to 
our indigenous British plants of the more complicated types of 
structure, flowering plants, and vascular Cryptogamia, of which the 
number of specific types is estimated by difi'erent authorities at a 
figure varying from 1,200 to 1,500. But I should like to pause for 
just one moment to point out to those amongst you who are not 
botanists, that our British flowering plants and ferns have been 
studied so long and by so many difi'erent observers, and under such 
favourable circumstances, that we probably know as much about them, 
from difi'erent points of view, as about any set of organised beings 
whatever ; and that for this reason they furnish a field of research 
specially adapted to support general conclusions. 

There is a special fitness in taking stock of the position which we 
occupy in our knowledge of British botanical geography just now, as 
we are in the position of an army that has lost its leader. My late 
friend, Hewett Cottrell Watson, who died eighteen months ago, made 
the study of the distribution of British plants the labour of his life, 
and worked at it through fifty years with unremitting patience and 
dilisfence. When he first turned his attention to the matter — when he 
was a student at the University of Edinburgh, attending the classes 
of Professor Graham, about 18o0 —botanical geography had no footing 
as a separate field of study. The only idea which botanists had then 
in registering plant -stations was to guide collectors to the places 
where they could gather the rarities. His first work was an octavo 
volume of 300 pages, entitled " Outlines of the Distribution of 
British Plants belonging to the division Vasculares," printed in 
Edinburgh in 1832, when he was 28 years old, for private distribution. 
Under the title of Remarks on the distribution of British plants, 
chiefly in connection with latitude, elevation, and climate," he 
published what is substantially a new edition of the same work in 
London, through Longman's, in 1835. In the same year he published 
the first volume of the New Botanist's Guide,'* and the second 



Baker, F.R.S. : Geography of British Plants. 



131 



followed two years later. This is planned upon the lines of the 
old "Botanist's Guide" of Turner and Dillwyn, and enumerates the 
special localities of the rare plants of England and Scotland, taking 
them county by county. In 1843 he issued the first part of a much 
more elaborate work on the plan of the Outlines. This was only 
carried out through the series of natural orders, following the Candol- 
lean sequence, as far as the Papaveracese, when the plan being found 
to be too cumbrous, the work was discontinued. The first volume of 
his '^magnum opus^^ — Cybele Britannica— appeared in 1847, and it 
was followed by vol. ii. in 1849, vol. iii. in 1852, and vol. iv. in 1859. 
It was his own original idea to apply the term Cyhele to a systematic 
treatise on the geographical distribution of the plants of any particular 
tract of country, applying it as parallel to the term Floro^ which has 
been used for a long time for a systematic description of the orders, 
genera, and species of any given tract. It is in the Oyhele that we 
have his plans for registering the details of x^lant distribution brought 
out and used in their full development. To each individual species 
he applies four different measuring-scales, each adapted to measure its 
distribution from a different point of view. To record its range of 
station he uses a series of adjectival terms, such as agrestal, paludal, 
glareal, sylvestral, &c. To register the horizontal distribution of the 
species he divides Britain into eighteen provinces, founded, as far as 
possible, on river drainage, so as not to infringe upon county bound- 
aries. Yorkshire is the only county that can claim a province to 
itself. What he calls the " Peninsular province " includes the three 
counties of Cornwall, Devonshire, and Somerset, and so on through 
the series. He traces the distribution of the species through these 
eighteen provinces by giving for each a line of figures indicating the 
provinces in which that particular species has been ascertained to grow. 
For further detail, suitable to be used in local work, these provinces 
were afterwards subdivided into 38 sub-provinces and 112 vice- 
counties. The vertical range of the species he registers by means of 
two regions of climate and altitudes, each divided into three zones. 
The Agrarian region includes all that portion of Britain in which it is 
possible, so far as climate goes, to grow corn and potatoes. Of course 
it includes the whole area of the island at sea level from north to 
south ; it includes also the hills up to 600 yards of elevation in the 
north of England, and up to 400 yards in the Scotch Highlands. All 
above this is mountain, rock and heather, with a temperature like that 
of the low levels in Arctic latitudes. Then he deals with each species 
from a historical point of view, classifiying them into natives, colonists. 



132 



The Naturalist. 



denizens, and aliens, according as tliey are aboriginal inhabitants of 
the country, or appear to have been introduced through man's agency, 
acting either indirectly or directly. And, finally, he separates out the 
species into their types of distribution — British, English, Atlantic, 
Germanic, Scotch, Highland or Intermediate, according to whether 
they are dispersed through the whole of the island, or preponderate in 
some part of it. In a Supplement of the Cybele " that came out in 
1860, the horizontal range of the species is traced through the 38 sub- 
provinces. In the three volumes of the Compendium" (1868-70) the 
species are again traced out through the provinces. Of course the 
earlier works raised up a number of helpers, who gladly aided him to 
make the later ones more complete. In the " Compendium," in 
addition, the dispersion of each species beyond the bounds of Britain 
is traced out ; and finally, in ^' Topographical Botany," 2 vols., 1873- 
74, the horizontal distribution of the species through the 112 vice- 
counties is traced out. Of this work only a limited number of copies 
was printed for private distribution. At the time of his death, Mr. 
Watson was engaged in the preparation of a second edition of it ; this 
Mr. Quaritch has undertaken to publish, and my friend Mr. Newbould 
and I have been engaged for the last year in seeing it through the 
press, and we expect it will be ready about midsummer. 

What, then, still remains to be done ? I make answer that, in the 
first place, we expect from every local or county Natural History society 
that if such information be not already placed on record, they should 
set to work to collect and publish a full account of the horizontal and 
vertical range of the plants of the area they deal with, explaining the 
circumstances under which each grows, what is its rarity or common- 
ness, and all particulars as to how it adapts itself to the different soils 
and geological strata that occur in the district. We have in Watson's 
" Topographical Botany," a separate catalogue for each of the five vice- 
counties of Yorkshire, but three out of the five still need dealing with 
in the way I have just indicated. The information in botany, which, 
primarily and particularly, we ask from you as a county society, is a 
full account of the distribution of species through the West and East 
ridings. For the West-Riding the genera] sketch contained in the 
^' West Yorkshire " of Dr. Arnold Lees and Mr. Davis is excellent as 
far as it goes, and there is also the small Flora of Miall and Carrington, 
but much more than this is still needed; and for the East-Riding there 
is nothing to turn to except the list in " Topographical Botany," and 
the scattered records in Baines's " Flora of Yorkshire " and its supple- 
ment. Looking beyond the bounds of Yorkshire, through the rest of 



Baker, F.R.S. : Geography of British Plants. 



133 



the nortli of England, we have no such records for the very interesting 
counties of Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Lancashire. I attempted 
long ago to collect notes about the Lake district, and if no one else 
enters the field, shall feel inclined to publish them, incomplete as they 
are ; and whilst speaking of this matter, I cannot leave it without 
expressing a hope that some day we may see in print, the full material 
which Mr. Warren has gathered together for Cheshire, which would be 
specially acceptable, because we have no recent flora for any western 
county. 

Broadly speaking, the external conditions which affect the dispersion 
of species may be classified under three heads. By these I mean, first, 
how a species is influenced by climate ; secondly, how it is influenced 
by soil ; and thirdly, how its dispersion at the present time is affected 
by its past history, and the changes that have taken place in the 
conformation of sea and land in past times. A fourth influence, to 
estimate which at its full value is one of the great lessons we have 
learnt from Mr. Darwin, is brought about by the large extent to which 
plants depend on insects for their fertilisation. This has been fully 
dealt with of late years by many investigators. Speaking of the other 
three factors, I should say that, for Britain as a whole, the vertical and 
horizontal range of each species has been so fully registered that the 
climatic range of the British plants is fully worked out, but that under 
the two other heads there are several fields of work that want further 
following out. 

In tracing out the pedigree of species, a great deal still remains to 
be done in gathering together, sifting, and testing the evidence derived 
from palseontology. As an example of a valuable recent contribution 
to our knowledge in this department, I may cite the memoir on the 
Ferns of the British Eocene Strata, recently published in the Transac- 
tions of the Palseontographical Society, by Mr. Starkie Gardiner and 
Baron von Ettingshausen. It would appear already in the eocene 
period, that the present sub-orders, and many of the present genera of 
ferns, were already differentiated, and there is no evidence of the 
existence then of any type of subordinal value that is not in existence 
now. There are at the present time eight distinct sub-orders of Filices, 
each distinguished by a characteristic type of sporange. Out of the 
forty-three British ferns which exist at the present day, thirty-seven 
species belong to Polypodiacea;, three to Hymenophyllacese, two to 
Ophioglossaceas, and one to Osmundacese. Four sub-orders, Gleiche- 
niaceae, Cyatheaceas, Marattiaceae, and Schizceaceee, are at the present 
day not represented in Britain, nor, in fact, anywhere in Europe. In the 



134 



The Naturalist. 



eocene fern-flora, three sub-orders out of the eight are absent, Cyath- 
eaceas, Hymenophyllaceae, and Ophioglossaceae. In Polypodiaceae there 
are ten species, all apparently belonging to genera now known, J d/mitum, 
Pteris, J'Foodioardia , Polypodium, and Jcrodlchum. There seems every 
reason to believe that the eocene Acrodiclimn is identical with Anros- 
tichum aurtim, one of the the commonest tropical marsh-ferns of the 
present day, both in the old and new world. Gleicheniacese is represented 
in the British eocenes by a single unmistakeable species. At the 
present day there are eighty species of this sub-order, widely spread in 
the tropical and south temperate zones, and two of them extending 
into temperate Asia. Of the sub-order Osmundaceae, there are two 
species in the eocene beds, one of them apparently identical with 0. 
regalis, and the other wdth 0. javanica, a species confined at the present 
time to tropical and temperate Asia. Of Schizseaceae there are two 
species of two genera, and of Marattiacese one species in the British 
eocene beds. Not long ago I asked one of our most experienced 
paleontologists to tell me, in general terms, what point of knowledge 
had been reached in the investigation of these early tertiary beds, and 
he estimated the number of their generic types, now known, at five 
hundred, of which four hundred are still in existence ; and of species, 
at two thousand, of w^hich, perhaps, fifty are still in existence. I 
suppose no competent authority would estimate the lapse of time 
between the close of the miocene period and the present day at less 
than five hundred thousand years. The most curious point about these 
rich tertiary floras is that there seems, broadly speaking, to be no 
geographical differentiation in them. In Greenland or Austria, or in 
our own island, at i^ournemouth, or in the London basin, they appear 
to contain substantially the same types. It is likely that in the next 
twenty years we shall reap a rich harvest from paleontological work. 

Upon the general question of evolution, an important light is thrown 
by studying the flora of Britain in comparison with that of Continental 
Europe. The most important general character of the British flora is 
its utter want of any distinctive individuality. Leaving out of count a 
few doubtful Hieracia, Willows, Bubi and Eoses, I can give only tw^o 
good instances of British plants that do not occur in Continental 
Europe. One of these, Potamogeton lanceolatus, is known in Cam- 
bridgeshire, Anglesea, and the north of Ireland ; the other, Eriocaulon 
septangular e, is found in Skye and Gahvay ; and, across the Atlantic, 
it is widely spread in North America. It is now generally believed 
that Britain was last separated from the Continent towards the close 
of the glacial period. I do not think' any competent authority would 



Short Notes and Queries. 



135 



consider that it was an extravagant suggestion that Britain may 
have been an island for a hundred thousand years. ^' If, then, out of 
1400 species which it produces, not one is distinct, this is a very sig- 
nificant fact. 

Perhaps the most important of all the generalizations established by 
Mr. Watson's labours was his separating out the plants of Britain 
according to their types of distribution. He worked out the fact that 
out of the 1425 British plants 532 are spread through the length and 
breadth of the island ; that a little over 600 are either confined to 
England or become quite rare when the Scotch border is crossed, and 
soon cease in a northern direction ; that out of these, 70 show a 
preference for the western and 127 for the eastern side of the island ; 
and that the boreal element is represented by 200 species, which are 
concentrated in the Scotch Highlands, and occur southward only 
amongst the mountains. And here again, the seas that separate 
Britain from the Continent seem to be of very small account. The 
500 species universal in Britain are mostly spread over the whole area 
of the Continent ; the 200 boreal species are plants of Scandinavia, 
which often extend southwards to the Alps of Central Europe. The 
600 characteristically English species are plants of the great Central 
European plain ; and the moisture-loving types, restricted with us to 
Ireland and the south-west of England, creep up from Portugal and 
the Asturias, and the country round Bordeaux, just as if no broad 
channel of waters intervened. The memoir | in which, long ago, Prof. 
Edward Forbes tried to work out what these types of distribution 
imply, is well known. I will not pursue the subject further now, 
than to point out the striking testimony which this whole series of 
facts furnishes to the long-continued stability of the present condition 
of things, as regards our specific types. 

( To he continued. J 



Otters in Halifax Parish. — About 70 years ago Squire Pinder shot 
an otter from EUand Bridge, as it was fishing on the damstones, in the 
grey of the morning. About 40 years since, James Hobson and others 
caught one in the Calder, in a large fishing-net ; another was caught at 

* See Wallace's "Island Life," p. 318. 

tMemoirs of Geological Survey, vol. i., p. 336. See also the shorter paper in 
the Anrals and Magazine of Natural History, vol. xvi,, p. 126. 



136 



The Naturalist. 



Brighouse since then. Over 60 years since, James Turner and John 
Nutton, of Grestland, were rat-hunting on the Calder under North Dean 
Wood. Their dog went up a drain from which there was a small stream 
flowing. They soon heard a fierce combat going on, the water became 
muddy and stained with blood, and out bolted a bitch otter and two 
cubs. The mother escaped, but the cubs were caught and kept alive for 
a short time. In September, 1873, some men were strolling on the banks 
of a small stream at Cotton Stones, R-ipponden. They had two dogs — a 
lurcher and a terrier — the former weighing 501bs, and the latter 22tbs, 
The dogs were set behind the remnants of an old burr- wall, and whilst 
they were digging in at each end, an otter made its way out at the top, 
between the wall and the bank, and made for the stream, which was so 
shallow that it could not dive. The fight then commenced. The strength 
and tenacity of the otter were remarkable ; it could have both dogs down 
at once. It soon had them both covered with blood, got from them and 
ran up a drain, from which they dug it out. It again made for the 
stream, the dogs and men after it ; and whilst the dogs worried, the men 
struck it across the back with a rail-pole, which rebounded as if they 
were striking at a tight-blown football. One man, who held it by the 
tail so that its hind feet could not touch the ground, said if it had been 
tailless they could not have captured it ; but holding its feet from the 
ground placed it at a disadvantage with regard to its wrestling powers. 
The otter weighed iT^lbs, and measured 4ft. Gin. from tip to tip. The 
skin was not perforated by the dogs' teeth. On Aug. 19th, 1876, a large 
otter was caught in a box-trap on the Calder. It had been seen to go up 
a drain near Messrs. Clay's dyehouse at Sowerby Bridge. In the winter 
of 1881 an otter was seen by the night-watchman at North Dean station, 
which, on being followed, ran into the Calder. It was traced on 
the snow and on the mud by the river-side, but not caught. — C. C. 
Hanson. 

Bird-Notes from Newton Kyme, near Tadcaster. — The Bev. J. 
Chaloner, rector of Newton Kyme, writing on the 2nd or 3rd of March, 
says that the week before last he saw nine goosanders together at that 
place, which is very unusual. The week of his writing he noted a pair of 
black-spotted woodpeckers. He has now in his yard a fine specimen of a 
wild duck having assumed the plumage of a mallard. 

NOTICES OF BOOKS, &c.—nepaticce Britannicce Exsiccatoe.—Fsisc. 
III. of this useful set of specimens has just been issued by Messrs. 
B. Carrington, M.D., and W. H. Pearson, and contains some very rare and 
interesting specimens, amongst them being Cephalozia ceraria, G. Fran- 
cisci, Nardia {Marsnpella) Stahleri, Lepidozia Fearsoniy Pttalophyllum 
Ealfsii, &c., &c. — in all 65 species and varieties. Subscriptions may be 
sent to Mr. W. H. Pearson, 6, Seedley Park Boad, Pendleton, Man- 
chester. 



llainfaU for g^thxmx^. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


HuDDERSFiELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


J? b, 

350 


In. 

2-ii 


17 


7-40 


•^5-40 


1 


0-32 


Halifax...{F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


3-38 


20 


11-78 


9-47 


10 


0-46 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


1-99 


18 


5-74 


t3-18 


17 


0-32 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


1-90 


17 


5-88 


J4-82 


17 


0-32 


Pateley Bridge... (E. War- 
burton, M.R.C.S.. L.S.A.) 


436 


4-45 


19 


8-76 


114-29 






Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


2-33 


14 


5-70 


4-18 


1 


0-42 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


3-95 


17 


10-50 


716 


1 


0-73 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


2-64 


15 


7-33 


2-90 


1 


0-47 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


2-24 


15 


4-36 


3-69 


11 


0-45 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


2-44 


15 


4-36 


§2-88 


10 


0-59 



* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. f Average of 29 years, 1853-62 & 1865-83. 
^ Average of 14 years, 1870-83. 
§ The total average for 32 years, 1850-82. || For year 1880. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Feb. 27, Mr. T. Lister, president, 
in the chair. — An interesting paper was read by Mr. T. Rose, entitled A Holiday 
in Holland, Belgium, and North France," with graphic descriptions of the places 
visited, interspersed with notes on Natural History. 

Meeting, March 15th, Mr. Lister presiding, — A valuable paper on " Carbon," 
with experiments, was given by Mr. G. M. W. Hutchin. Mr. G. H. Teasdale 
reported that an owl had been heard in Silkstone Hall Wood, before the last 
severe frost. A pied blackbird was seen near Dodwoith station on March 8th. 
A flock of the common snipe flew to north-west on the 5th ; the lapwings had 
returned to their old haunts Feb. 25th ; many pied wagtails and yellow-hammers 
noted on the 11th. These last birds sang on the IGth Feb., and chafi&nches on 
the 9th. The missel and song-thrush, and the above-named songsters, have 
frequently been heard during the present frost. Thrushes are still scarce here, 
but more numerous near Hemsworth. — T. L. 

Beverley Field NATURALisrs' and Scientific Society. — 21st meeting, held 
February 22nd, the President (Mr. J. A. Eidgway) in the chair. After the 
routine business had been disposed of, the Rev. W. Smith read an interesting 
paper on the ''Cellular tissues of Plants," illustrating his remarks by a number 
of carefully prepared micro-slides and dissections of living specimens. Amongst 
the exhibits were 47 species of Gramince, 1 6 Carices, and a very fine horn of the 
red deer, dug up in Swinemoor, Beverley, brought by Mr. Boyes ; a pair of 
waxwings, Ampelis garrulus, shot in Beverley Westwood, by Mr. Cheny ; micro- 
slides showing plant-culture, by the Eev. W. Smith, and living specimens of 
diatoms, marine algge, and Crustacea belonging to the Pycnogonidce^ by Mr. 
Butterell. 

Meeting, March 8th. The President (Mr. J. A. Ridgway) occupied the chair. 
The Rev. E. J. Barry presented to the Society two store cases for insects. A 
number of carefully prepared micro-slides of animal parasites, chiefly from birds, 
were shown by Mr. John Watson, and Mr. Butterell exhibited specimens of two 
zoophytes, Plimularia falcata and Sertularia operculata. 



138 



The Natuealtst. 



Malton Katuraltsts' Society. — Annual general meeting ; Mr. Gr. W. 
Slater in the chair. Mr. T. Lister, the secretary, read the annual report, and 
Mr. W. Hodgson, the treasurer, the financial report. Mr. M. B. Slater was then 
called on to report on the work of the botanical section during the year. He 
chiefly referred to what had been done at the meeting of the Naturalists' Union 
at Selby, quoting from the report of that meeting, and the president's address. 
He also mentioned some of the best plants obtained during the year. One of 
the rarest and most interesting, sent by Mr. Barugh, of Octon G-range, was 
Bupleurum rotmidi folium. An important thing sent by Mr. Boynton, of TJlrome, 
was a moss found on an embedded log, supposed to be the remains of an ancient 
lake dwelling, Antitrichia curtipe.idula. Mr Chadwick next gave an account of 
what had been done by the g'eological section, Mr. A. H. Taylor reported for the 
conchological section, and Mr. A. W. Walker for the ornithological. The election 
of officers was then proceeded with ; the Hon. H. W. Fitzwilliam. M.P., was re- 
elected president, and Mr T. Lister secretary. At the next meeting of the 
Society on April 16th, Mr. T. Lister, the secretary, will read a paper on British 
Grasses. 

Manchester Cryptogamtc Society. — Monthly meeting ; Dr. B. Carrington, 
F.RS.E., in the chair. Mr. W. H. Pearson exhibited a specimen copy of the 
Fasc. III. Hepaticse Britannicae Exsiccatae, containing many new and rare 
species, amongst which were noticed Marsiqyella Stableri^ Cephalozia Francisci, 
C. ceraria^ C. Tumeric Bazzania trilohata^ Lepidozia Fearsoni, Dr. J. B. Wood 
sent specimens of Buxbaumia indmi 'ta, and B, aphylla, both species having been 
gathered by himself in the same locality during his visit to the Vosges, August, 
1872 ; the B. indusiata growing on rotten wood, and the B, aphylla, on the 
ground. He also sent specim3ns of Dichelyma capillaceiim in fruit from Norway 
and N. America. Mr. George Stabler and Dr. R. Spruce were elected honorary 
members of the Society. — T. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 

Meeting, March 9th, Captain P. G. Cunliffe, F.R.M.S., in the chair.— Mr. 
James Cash exhibited specimens of CincUdium stygium from Malham Tarn, and 
read an interesting paper on its history as a British moss ;* Mr. Wm. Forster, 
a remarkably handsome and robust variety of Folystichum angulare : it belonged 
to the multilobum type of variation, and was strongly set with bulbils along the 
rachis of the frond. — Thos. Rogers, Hon. Sec, 

St. Thomas's Field Naturalists' Society, York. — Monthly meeting Feb. 
22nd, in St. Thomas's Schools, Lowther-street. Mr. S. Walker occupied the 
chair. Mr. Guy showed specimens of FucUdia glyphica^ FucUdia mi. Mania 
typica^ Flusia chrysitis, Hadena pisi, Fianthmcia capsincola^ Oalocampa exoleta^ and 
F. monacha. Mr. Wilkinson sent for exhibition the following lepidoptera : — 
Catacola sponsa, 0. promissa, Folia chi, Agriopis aprilina^ Epunda nigra, Fuplexia 
lucipara, Fladena protea, H. peregrina, thalassina, and Cloantha solidaginis. 
Mr. R. B. Cook exhibited the following British land shells \~ Helix virgata, from> 
Bristol and Kent, with the variety alha^ from Bristol, and the variety sub- 
maritima, from Weston-super-Mare ; also H. caperata, with a rare unnamed 
variety, and the variety ornata, all from Bristol. Mr. Barker showed the follow- 
ing nocturni : — Smerinthus ocellatiis^ S. popuU., Sphinx ligustri^ Clixrocampa 

* Will be published in our next issue. 



Reports of Societies. 



139 



elpenor ; also a fine example of Acherontia Atropos and its chrysalis ; he also sub- 
mitted living spec'mens of Limnea paliistris, and other fresh water shells, from 
Strensall Common. The ch;iirnfian exhibited a case of geom-troe, containing, 
amongst others, a tine series of the annexed, showing in many instances great 
deviation of colour : — TJrapteryx samhitcata, Enmmos erosaria, E. angularia^ 
Epione apiciaria^ Eurymene dolabraria^ and Selenia lunaria. Mr. C. D. Wolsten- 
holme then gave an interesting paper on "The Snipe" fHcolopax qalUnago)^ 
describing its structure and habits, with special reference to the remarkable 
humming sound produced by the male bird during breeding time, supposed to 
be caused by the position of the wings in the falling flight of the bird. The 
paper was illustrated with a series of eggs of the snipe, together with a specimen 
of the bird. He also exhibited an egg of the griffon vulture ( Vultur fulvus) 
taken in Spain. A conversation on the various exhibits concluded the meeting. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Monthly meeting, 
February i^6th, the President (Mr. S. J. Capper) occupying the chair. The 
President, in the course of a short address, referred to the death of an old member 
of the society, the late Mr. Benjamin Cooke, of Southport, and he gave a short 
resume of his life as an entomologist. The honorary secretary (Dr. Ellis) read 
a paper, entitled "Passive means of defence in Insects," in which he briefly 
noted a number of cases of protective resemblance in various orders of insects, 
and afterwards alluded to cases of so-called " mimicry" in lepidoptera. During 
the conversazione, Mr. Robert Brown exhibited a specimen of Nyssia zonaria 
which had remained nearly 20 months in the pupa state, and Mr. J. Wall ex- 
hibited scales of lepidoptera under the microscope. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — 21st Annual Meeting, Selby, 
March 3rd, 1883. — This year the Union was received by the Selby 
Naturalists' Society at a microscopic soiree and conversazione, in the 
Public Rooms, and their enthusiasm and kindly hospitality to fellow- 
members from other districts left nothing to be desired. The annual 
meeting for transaction of business was held at 3 p.m., under the genial 
chairmanship of the Hev. William Fowler, M.A., of Liversedge. There 
was a moderately large attendance, numbering about 70 or 80, the 
the following 23 societies (out of 35) being represented : — Barnsley, 
Beverley, Bradford, Dewsbury, Doncaster, Elland-cum-Greetland, Goole, 
Halifax, Heckmondwike, Huddersfield (2)^ Ukley, Leeds (3), Liversedge, 
Malton, Scarborough, Selby, Wakefield, and York (2). On the sugges- 
tion of the chairman the minutes of the previous annual meeting, being 
somewhat long, were taken as read. The Shipley Field Naturalists' Club 
was then admitted into the Union on the motion of Mr. H. S. Ward, 
seconded by Mr. J. W.Davis, F.S.A., &c., of Halifax. Thanks wwe 
then voted to the new subscribers ("Mr. Hugh Richardson, Ackworth, 
and Mr. W. Officer, Hull), and to the donors of gifts to the library 
(including 24 volumes of British Association reports and a set of the 
Ashmolean Society's publications.) The following annual report was 
then read by Mr. W. Eagle Clarke, one of the secretaries : — The 
Council, in presenting their Twenty-first Annual Report, congratulate 



140 



The Naturalist. 



the members apon the Union having now attained its majority — in itself 
a strong evidence of vitality — and while considering that it is at present 
in a sound and healthy condition, more especially as regards its member- 
ship, feel that they would be failing in their duty were they not to express 
their opinion that the attendance at the meetings calls for the serious 
attention of the members. The Field Meetings during the year — for each 
of which the usual arrangements were made and circulars issued — were 
six in number. The places visited were — Beverley on Whit Monday, 
May 29th ; Snaith on Saturday, June 17th ; Scarborough on Saturday, 
J uly 15th ; Grassington on Monday, Aug. 7th ; Wakefield on Saturday, 
Sept. 6th ; Thirsk for Pilmoor on Saturday, Oct. 7th. There have been 
— probably to a greater extent^ than in most years — remarkable fluctua- 
tions both in the attendance at, and the success of, the meetings ; and 
while there cannot but be gratification with the manner in which the 
anticipations of the promoters of some of the excursions were realised, it 
is matter for regret that at others the attendance was discouraging, 
particularly as it involved heavy pecuniary loss to the Union in respect ef 
the guarantees entered into for the tea. The smallness of the attendance 
was not attributable to any inaccessibility of the place of meeting, for the 
three places with which most disappointment was felt were convenient of 
access to large centres of population. The weather accounted for two of 
these failures, as the Thirsk meeting was utterly marred by rain, and the 
Scarboro' one partially so. The smallness of the attendance at Wakefield 
is more inexplicable, considering the very central position of that town. 
On the other hand, the Grassington meeting, fixed for one of the most 
remote and inaccessible of places, was remxarkably successful, both as to 
attendance and as to the chara,cter of the work done ; and the Council 
feel that this circumstance demonstrates that the members appreciate to 
the full the importance of arranging for the investigation of localities 
whose natural history is but little known. Railway Arrangements. — 
During the past year the railway companies have granted us increased 
facilities. The North Eastern Railway Co. have, in connection with each 
of our meetings, allowed our members to obtain return tickets at reduced 
fares to the place of meeting, on production of the stamped card of mem- 
bership at the booking-ofiice. The privilege has been conceded by all the 
other companies in Yorkshire for the present meeting, with the additional 
convenience of its being made available on through tickets. It is hoped 
that members will avail themselves largely of these concessions, and so 
insure the success of our future meetings. — The Societils in imion at the 
commencement of the year were 31 in number. Out of these, the Hud- 
dersfield Scientific Club has virtually ceased to exist. On the other hand 
five newly established societies, all of them vigorous and flourishing, have 
been admitted. These are — Beverley Field Nat. Soc, 43 members ; 
Ilkley Scientific Club, 53 ; Ripon Nat. Club and S. A., 98 ; Scarboro' 
Scientific Society, 60 ; and York St. Thomas's F.N.S., 47: total, 301 
members. The statistics furnished by the diflferent societies show that 



Reports of Societies. 



141 



the 35 societies possess in the aggregate 2100 members, which, with the 
300 subscribers, shews a total individual membership of about 2400 
members — an increase of 322 during the year. Publications. — Part V. of 
the Transactions is now in the printer's hands, and will be issued as soon 
as possible, to be followed by the other parts in arrear. Various causes 
have combined to retard the punctual issue of the Transactions, but 
arrangements have been made with the view of overcoming these 
hindrances. Various papers of value have been received during the year 
for publication in the Transactions. Mr. Porritt's Catalogue of the 
Lepidoptera of Yorkshire — a work which our lepidopterists have much 
needed for some time — has been completed, and is now in the hands of 
the printer. The Report on the Fungus Foray of 1881, with the full list 
of species then collected, has been completed by Mr. Massee, and papers 
have been received from the Rev. H. H. Slater and others. It will be 
well here to point out again how inadequate the present income of the 
Union is, and your Council would suggest that a systematic effort to 
increase it should be made. Calculation shows that if the Union pos- 
sessed 500 regular subscribers at 5s. (not an extravagant number to 
expect), it would permit of the issue of about 200 pages of printed 
matter each year, and so enable the publication committee to cope with 
the large amount of valuable manuscript now awaiting publication. The 
balance available for this purpose on the amount of the present average 
income will only admit of about 60 pages per year. It should not be 
forgotten that the expenses of the meetings and the general manage uient 
have first to be defra3^ed out of the income, and that the surplus only — 
or excess of income over expenditure — is available for the publications. 
The expenses just mentioned are not, however, liable to increase propor- 
tionally with the increase of the income, and they may be considered as 
practically a stationary amount. Consequently it will be seen that the 
whole of any increase" in the Union's income is available for the publica- 
tons, — The Library, which consists of books and pamphlets acquired by 
donation or by exchange, has benefitted during the year by some accept- 
able additions. Besides the exchanges, several members — amongst whom 
Mr. G. T. Porritt and Mr. C. P. Hobkirk, who have each given a large 
number of donations, may be cited— have contributed in this way. Mrs. 
Windsor has presented a copy of the ' Flora Cravoniensis,' and the 
British Association 24 volumes of their reports. Several numbers of the 
Mineralogical Society's Magazine, one of which is a geological map of 
Sutherland, have been received from that society ; while from the Tyne- 
side Naturalists' Field-Club have been received a complete set of seven 
vols, of the valuable Natural History Transactions of Northumberland 
and Durham. Income. — The number of subscribers has remained 
stationary at about 300, the withdrawals having nearly balanced the 
additions to the list. When the arrears of transactions have been over- 
come, it may be expected that the number of subscribers will again 
increase. Proposed Map. — On this head there is nothing to report, the 



142 



The Naturalist. 



map committee not having met during the year. — In conclusion, your 
Council trust that the coming year may be one of prosperity, and that 
their successors will, at the close be able to make a more satisfactory report 
than the present one." — The Balance-Sheet, which showed a balance in 
hand, was also read. There was some discussion as to the heavy cost of 
some of the meetings, in course of which the secretaries explained that 
about £4 was the minimum cost at which an excursion could be worked, 
involving as it did the issue of 2,500 or more copies of a closely-printed 
circular, and its postage to members, besides incidental expenses. In the 
case of meetings costing more than this, it was caused by the failure of 
guarantees which had been given to tea-providers. The report and 
balance-sheet were then adopted, on the motion of Mr. Thomas Hick, 
B.A., B.Sc, seconded by Mr. C. D. Wolstenholme, of York. The excur- 
sion programme for 1883, as recommended by the Council, was then 
arranged as follows : — Doncaster for Sandal Beat, Whit-Monday, May 
14 ; J^iley for Flamborough, Monday, June 11 ; Strensall Common, 
Saturday, July 14 ; Washburn Valley, Bank Holiday Monday, Aug. 6; 
and Malham, Saturday, Sept. 1 ; being an excursion for each of the 
Parliamentary divisions of the county. The sixth excursion (the fungus 
foray), on which a sub-committee had been appointed to consider and 
report, was left over for the decision of the Council, to whom the sub- 
committee was directed to report. The invitation from the Barnsley 
Naturalists' Society, for the following annual meeting to be held in their 
town, was accepted for the first Tuesday in March, 1884. The election 
of officers was next proceeded with. Mr. John Gilbert Baker, F.R.S, of 
Kew, was unanimously re-elected president, on the motion of Mr. Hick, 
seconded by Mr. John Emmett, of Boston Spa. Mr. Wm. Denison 
Roebuck and Mr. W^m. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., both of Leeds, were unani- 
mously re-elected joint honorary secrefcaries, on the proposition of Mr. 
Washington Teasdale, F.R.M.S., of Leeds, seconded by Mr. J. J. Stead, 
of Heckmondwike. Auditors were also chosen, Messrs. B. Holgate, 
F.C.S., and W. B. Russell, L L.B., both of Leeds, being re-elected. A 
letter from Mr. John W. Taylor, of Leeds, was read, wherein he offered, 
with the view of stimulating original investigation in Yorkshire con- 
chology, two prizes — value one guinea and half-a-guinea — for the best 
collections (accompanied by remarks) of Belix arhustorum, special atten- 
tion being paid to variation and distribution ; adding that original notes 
of any kind, whether upon embryology, anatomy, habits, food, or 
relationship to soil and climate, would add to the merit of the collection, 
and that neatness of arrangement of the specimens or literary finish in 
the accompanying notes (however desirable in themselves) were to be 
regarded as quite of subsidiary importance. Mr. Taylor's ofier was 
accepted with thanks, a hope being expressed that the competitors retain 
their collections, on the motion of Mr. J, W. Davis, seconded by Mr. 
W. D. Roebuck. The draft of a new prospectus, embodying the 
constitution and practice of the Union as set forth in numerous resolu- 



Keports of Societies. 



143 



tions scattered up and down the minute books, with such changes as 
experience gained during six years showed to be advisable, was then 
read by Mr. Clarke. The adoption of the recommendation of the Council 
that it be authorized was then moved by the Rev. W. Fowler, and 
seconded by Mr. Roebuck. Mr. Fowler pointed out that a prospectus or 
circular, setting forth the Union's objects, aims, and methods of proce- 
dure, was very much needed, and expressed an opinion that it would lead 
to a considerable increase in the membership. Mr. Roebuck explained 
that the principal changes proposed in the existing practice were the 
raising of the minimum subscription to 5s. , and the establishment of an 
executive, or working committee of ten members, in addition to the 
president and secretaries. He defended the raising of the subscription, 
on the ground that the experiment of fixing it at 2s. 6d. had failed, the 
members of the affiliated societies generally not having taken advantage 
of so low a minimum to anything like the extent that might reasonably 
have been expected. It was explained, too, that existing subscribers of 
less than 5s. who kept up their payments without interruption, and were 
unable or unwilling to pay more, should retain their privileges at the old 
rate. The discussion that took place had reference to the tenure of the 
presidency, the prospectus being altered in ihis respect to suit the views of 
the majority of the members present, and the prospectus was unanimously 
adopted as amended. Thanks were voted to the president ; to the secreta- 
ries and other officers ; and to the Selby Society for their reception of the 
Union that day. It was now 4-30 p.m., and the meeting was adjourned 
until 6. In the meantime the sections held their annual meetings, which 
resulted in the election of the foUowiug officers : — The Vertebrate Section 
elected Mr. J. Cordeaux, M.B.O. U., of Great Cotes, president, and re- 
elected Mr, W. Eagle Clarke, F. L. S. , of Leeds, secretary ; the Conchological 
Section chose the Rev. W. C. Hey, M.A., of York, as president, and 
re-elected Mr. J. D. Butterell, of Beverley, as secretary ; the Entomo- 
logical Section re-elected both their officers, Mr. Geo. T. Porritt, F.L.S., 
of Huddersfield being president, and Mr. E. B. Wrigglesworth, of Wake- 
field secretary ; this section also passed a resolution inviting Mr. S. L. 
Mosley to act as recorder in economic entomology, with the view of 
drawing the attention of members to- this important subject ; the 
Botanical Section re-elected their president, Mr. Thomas Hick, B.A., 
B.Sc, of Harrogate, and their cryptogamic secretary, Mr. Geo. Massee, 
of Scarborough, choosing for their phanerogamic secretary Mr. P. F. 
Lee, of Dewsbury ; while the Geological Section elected Mr. J. W. 
Davis, F.L.S., F.G.S., of Halifax, as their president, and re-elected their 
two secretaries, Mr. J. E. Wilson of Bradford, and the Rev. E. M. Cole, 
M.A., of Wetwang. A good meat tea was then partaken of at the 
Londesbro Arms Hotel, after which at 6 p.m. the meeting was resumed 
punctually at the Public Rooms. The chair was now occupied by Mr. 
Mark Scott, president of the Selby Naturalists' Society, who introduced 
Mr. J. G. Baker, F.R.S., to a numerous audience. Mr. Baker having 



144 



The Naturalist. 



delivered the presidential address [printed at p. 129 of this volume] a 
vote of thanks to him was moved by the Rev. Wm. Jessop, of Shipley, 
seconded by Mr. C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., of Huddersfield, and unani- 
mously adopted. Mr. Baker replied, and proposed a similar vote to the 
chairman, which was seconded by Mr. Thos. Hick, and carried. This 
concluded the business of the Union, and the remainder of the evening 
was given up to the examination of the numerous objects of interest 
which the Selby 'people had provided for the soiree. Microscopes and 
objects were shown by Messrs. B. Holgate, F.C.S. (coal-plants), Percy 
Lund (rock-sections), Jno. Harrison (Naidina, showing peristaltic action, 
&c. ), E. B. Wrigglesworth (spiders), R. J. Farmer, J. E. Wilson (better 
bed coal-slides and rock-sections). Rev. F. Hunter (polarised objects), 
Thomas Bunker, J. Bennett (vinegar eels), P. Smith (trichinous human 
muscle, &c.). Miss May Kerdall (vorticellse), W. Standering, G. D. Todd 
(Bacillus tuher miosis, or consumption germs), W. N. Cheesman (monads 
and bacteria), Vincent Taylor, B.A. (a growing seed — Collomia coccinia), 
and others. Of other exhibits, Mr. H. T. Soppitt showed micro-fungi 
from the United States, and Mr. W. West had sent a series of Sphagna, 
showing the variability of the species. Mr. Joseph Pulleyn had cases of 
stuffed birds, and Mr. Richard Kendall some cases of butterflies. 
Insects, &c., were on view for Mr. David Smith. Round the walls were 
shown an exquisite series of magnified sketches from Nature of infusoria 
and diatoms, drawn in white upon black cardboard by Mr. J. M. Kirk, 
of Doncaster ; he also shewed animal life in water by means of the 
electric light and paraboloid. Mr. M. B. Slater exhibited type specimens of 
the British mosses and hepatics, and Sir Charles Strickland some charac- 
teristic liassic, oolitic, and cretaceous fossils. Geological specimens were 
also shown by Mr. H, Liversedge, jun. , F.G.S., and mounted specimens 
of British and exotic ferns by Mr. Peter Kendall. Mr. W. Denison 
Roebuck showed to enquiring conchologists living examples of Limax 
gagates from Hampshire, and Dr. J. Mitchell Wilson had bacteria in 
water, with illustrations of a new method of water analysis. Of other 
objects, Mr. Washington Teasdale showed an interesting series of photo- 
graphs, printed by the platinotype process, and Mr. Thomas Bunker a 
number of Natural History specimens imported with foreign dyewoods 
into Goole ; Mr. T. Ullathorne, a series of measured drawings of Selby 
Abbey Church. During the evening Mr. R. J. Farmer performed some 
electrical experiments and exhibited an electrical railway, pump, &c., 
and Mr. C. H. Bothamley, F.C.S., gave an address on Artificial Indigo 
(illustrated with experiments), while from time to time music and 
singing, under the direction of Mr. Wm. Rawling, added to the enjoy- 
ment of the visitors. The ladies of Selby must not be forgotten, who 
provided light refreshments, and were most assiduous and kind in their 
attentions to the visitors. Altogether, the meetings were summed up by 
the members as among the most pleasant and social gatherings in which 
the Union has ever participated. — W. D. R., W. E. C. 



ON THE PRESENT STATE OP OUR KNOWLEDGE OP 
THE GEOGRAPHY OF BRITISH PLANTS. 
(Concluded, ) 

By J. Gilbert Baker, F.R.S., &c. 



[The Annual Address op the President to the Members op the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union, at Selby, on March 3rd, 1883.] 

Another important set of facts bearing upon the pedigree of our 
indigenous plants, is furnished by their distribution beyond the bounds 
of the island. Some of the common plants of the north temperate zone 
have an extremely wide dispersion. Let us take a few of our best 
known ferns as instances. Osmunda regalis is spread in the old world 
from Sweden to Japan, and reappears in the Himalayas, the Alps, 
and the mountains of the Indian peninsula. In Africa it is found in 
the Barbary States, Abyssinia, Cape Colony, Angola, and Sierra Leone ; 
and in America it is spread from Canada and the Red River as far 
south as Rio Janeiro. Cysto'pteris fragilis is found everywhere in 
Europe and Asia, from Iceland eastward to Kamschatka, and from the 
Arctic Circle southward to the Himalayas, where it reaches an altitude 
of 15,000 feet. It reappears in the mountains of Abyssinia, Fernando 
Po, Bourbon and Cape Colony, in Tasmania, New Zealand, and the 
Sandwich Islands, and in America is found in the temperate regions 
both on the north and south of the equator, and in many places in the 
tropical zone amongst the Andes. Aspidium aculeotum, Nephrodium 
filix-mas, and Pteris aquilina are spread equally widely. Of the 1425 
British species only about 300 are restricted to Europe, whilst 450 
reach America, 250 the Himalayas, and nearly 100 the southern 
hemisphere. We always take for granted that a species has spread 
from a single centre, and if this be the case, what an enormous amount 
of time we must allow for this wide diffusion of types to have taken 
place, and what an amount of change in the configuration of sea and 
land must have taken place since they first started upon their travels ! 

Another important field for investigation is the light thrown upon 
the pedigree of species by the study of our more variable specific types. 
I can see no solution that will in any way account for a wide mass of 
facts except the Darwinian one — that between slight individual modifi- 
cations, varieties, and sub-species and species, no clear line of demar- 
cation can be drawn. Every fresh year teaches us that, even amongst 
organisms which have been studied as closely as our British flowering 

plants, specific types that have been supposed to be stable and uniform 
N.S., Vol. viil May, 1883. 



Tpie Naturalist. 



are in reality plastic and variable. For instance, within the last year 
or two Mr. Nicholson has shown us that no clear line of demarcation 
can be drawn between Fapaver khoeas and Fapaver duhium^ and Mr. 
Arthur Bennett is fast reducing Potamo(^eton to the condition of Salix 
and Rieraceum. Within the bounds of Britain we possess about two 
hundred of what Sir J. D. Hooker and Dr. Boswell call " sub-species " — 
types of a kind that the majority of descriptive botanists place upon a 
par with species, but which are not limited quite so definitely. In 
addition to these 1400 specific types, we acknowlege 300 or 400 
named varieties — types betw^een which and their species no clear line 
of demarcation can be drawn, but yet which are considered to be 
thought worthy of a distinctive name. It would be a very inter- 
esting subject for inquiry what this proportion that exists in our 
fiora, of six species of full rank to every one sub-species, and 
every two varieties, implies. For my own part, if I were asked 
to explain it, I could only say that I was completely unable to 
do so. Although I do not think that any farther w^ork in this 
direction is at ail likely to modify the conclusion that has already 
been indicated, there is a wide field here for collecting and correlating 
facts, many of them of a kind that can be investigated suitably by a 
local country botanist with limited leisure. For instance, it would be 
quite within the scope of anyone with a small garden, to raise from 
seed for a few years some of the numerous varieties of Viola tricolor^ 
and itfe sub-species arvends, latea, and Curtisii, and keep a record of 
what happened ; or to bring half-a-dozen of the native Epilobia or 
liiimices into his garden, and make experiments in hybridizing them. 
Work of this kind can be done far better in a quiet little garden in 
the country than in a large establishment like (yambridge or Kew. 
There is no one now that I know of who has any large number of 
these critical " British plants under cultivation, like Mr. Watson 
used to have twenty years ago in his small garden at Thames Ditton. 

In accounting for the variation of our more variable specific types, 
I do not think that the Darwinian principle of the propagation by 
natural selection of characters that aid the organism in the struggle for 
existence will carry us very far. In Rubas, for instance, in which of 
all our indigenous generic types we get the widest range of variation 
between remote extremes without any clear line of demarcation, one 
can scarcely believe that any varietal or sub-specific type (a few 
hybrids like H, pseudo-u/oeus, and manifest degradations like R. Leesii, 
excepted) possesses any character or capacity that, in the struggle for 
life, will ^ive iu an ad v antage over any other. The two facts in Ruhus 



Baker, F.R.S. : Geography of British Plants. 147 

that have most attracted my attention in this connection are these : 
the first, that in Yorkshire some of the types which though plentiful 
are sharply limited as regards individuality, in the neighbourhood of 
London, though not more plentiful, slide off into others through 
gradual intermediate stages. I have found that this holds good for 
R. discolor, leucostachys, and diver dfolius. The other fact is, that in 
the interior of the Lake country, round the shores of Windermere, 
Derwentwater, Ulles water, and Coniston, the common types of the 
surrounding country, especially co&sius^ corylijolius, and discolor , do not 
penetrate. 

Turning next to the influence of soil, I found that in the North 
Riding 40 species out of 872 natives, or one species out of every 22, 
were manifestly influenced in their distribution by a predilection for 
limestone rock, and that in the same area 40 species were restricted to 
the neighbourhood of the sea. In this last case, no doubt chemical 
reasons are the determinant element, but there are two points about 
the matter worthy of further inquiry. Many of these characteristically 
maritime species grow inland occasionally, like Armeria rnaritima 
amongst the Wensleydale lead mines, and Flantago rnaritima on the 
Teesdale sugar limestone. In some cases, as Coclilearia officinalis, we 
have two well-marked varieties — one on the shore, and the other 
amongst the mountains ; and we find that many of these types, 
characteristically maritime w^hen wild, grow easily without any special 
treatment in inland gardens. As instances I may cite cabbage, 
seakale, and celery. We w^ant some one who is both chemist and 
botanist to investigate the circumstances under which these maritime 
plants grow away from the sea, and explain to us what it implies. 

As regards the minute circumstances connected with soil that afi'ect 
species-distribution, gardeners could teach botanists a great deal, if they 
would keep their eyes open, in the routine of their daily work. The 
most valuable recent contribution to our knowledge in this direction is 
Kerner's Cultur der Alpenpflanzen " published at Innsbruck in 
1864, of which an excellent abstract in English appeared in the 
number of Mr. Robinson's periodical called The Garden," for Dec. 
10th, 1881. Kerner's observations refer to the plants of the Alps of 
Central Europe, and in the first place he classifies the species into 
three groups, according to the amount of humus, or vegetable matter, 
which they need. In the first group, those that can grow in a soil, 
poor in humus, he places the alpine Crucifers, Crassulaceae, Alsines, 
Silenes, and most of the Compositse. In the second group, composed 
ol; species that grow well on soil composed of vegetable humus and 



148 



The Naturalist. 



inorganic detritus mixed in equal proportions, he places the PotentillaSy 
Primulas, Gentians, Orchids, Leguminosae, Umbelliferae, CyperacesSy 
and grasses. In the third group, which need a soil rich in humus, he 
places the Junci, Luzulas, Heaths, Vaccinia, Ferns, and Lycopodia. 
In a second list he classifies the species in three groups, according to 
whether they succeed best in soil containing lime, or whether lime 
harms them, or whether they are indifferent to it. Among the lime- 
lovers he places Campanula pusilla, Gypripedium Calceolas^ Draha 
aizoides, Dry as octopetala^ Primula auricula^ Scabiosa lucida, Ruhus 
saxatilis, and Phyteuma orhiculare ; amongst the lime-haters he 
classifies Jllosoras crispus, Asplen'mm septentrionale, the Broseras, 
Linncea borealis, Lycopodlum alpinum and Selago, Viola lutea^ Salix 
herbacea^ Trientalis europcsa^ and Scirpus ccespitoms ; amongst the 
species indifferent to lime he places Aspidium Lonchitis^ Gentiana verna, 
Lychnis ulpina, Saxifraga aizoides and stellaris. And, finally, he again 
classifies all the species under three groups, according as to whether 
they grow best in a sandy or a clayey soil, and are indifferent in this 
respect. So that we get a full classification of all the species notedy 
made from three different points of view, which is eminently suggestive 
in its bearing upon their dispersion as wild plants. 

We have in the North of England five hill-masses of different and 
well-marked lithological constitution — the porphyritic Cheviots ; the 
slate hills of the Lake country ; our great hill-mass of North-East 
Yorkshire, made up of lias and oolite ; and the great backbone ridge 
of the Pennine chain, underlaid by limestone grits and shales of 
carboniferous age. Several years ago I made a calculation"^ that out 
of the 201 boreal plants of Britain we had 102 in the North of 
England, and that out of these, in the Cheviot range there were 38, in 
I North-East Yorkshire 33, amongst the slate hills (which have a 
damper climate arid rise to a higher level than the other three ranges) 
79 species, and amongst the Pennine chain in the North Eiding, 76. 
I should like to see this contrast between the four hill-masses worked 
in detail, not for the montane species alone, but also for the plants of 
the British type, and for those of the English type that reach up 
amongst the mountains. How is it, then, in Teesdale there is such a 
nest of mountain plants concentrated within a limited area at a com- 
paratively low level '? Out of the 1 00 montane plants of the North of 
England, ten species are almost or quite restricted to an area of a few 
square miles in the superagrarian zone in Upper Teesdale — a few 

* On the distribution of tke montane plants of the North of England, in 
Trimen's " Journal of Botany," Sept., 1871. 



Baker, F.R.S. : Geography of British Plants. 



149 



square miles which it so chances fall within the bounds of three 
counties, Yorkshire, Durham, and Westmoreland. 

Another point that I should wish to commend especially to the study 
of the botanists of the north of England, is the distribution of the 
species of what Watson calls the Intermediate type of distribution. 
These are about 40 in number, and are concentrated, so far as Britain 
is concerned, amongst the hills of the north of England. But then 
they are all, I believe, plants that reappear in Central Europe, and with 
us they form an outlying colony, widely dissevered from their central 
area. I believe it would be found, if their general distribution was 
worked out, that they are species of a comparatively boreal tendency, 
so far as climate is concerned, and that they have a special affinity for 
limestone, and that the want of limestone has kept them from spreading 
northwards into Scotland. 

But it is quite time that I should come to a conclusion. In one sense 
it has been a great pleasure to me to come down to Yorkshire again, 
after nearly twenty years of absence, and take the chair at the annual 
meeting of a society that represents more than two thousand of the 
inhabitants of my native county, banded together for the promotion of 
Natural Science ; but it has also made me remember how many of those 
with whom I worked and rambled a generation ago have passed away 
from amongst us. Since I left Yorkshire how many of the botanists 
that were then old or middle-aged have gone to join the great majority 
— Henry Baines, John Nowell, Willam Mudd, James Ward, James 
Backhouse, John Tatham, Silvanus Thompson, Gerard Smith, 
Abraham Stansfield, William Bean, John Windsor ; and now we 
have lost our leader, Hewett Watson, the father of British botanical 
geography, who, although he left the county at a very early age, was 
also a Yorkshireman. 

Like clouds that rake the mountain summit, 
Like waves that own no curbing hand, 
How fast has brother followed brother 
From sunshine to the sunless land. 

Within this last quarter of a century Darwin has pulled up the 
old tree of Natural History by the roots, and planted it in fresh soil. 
A new generation has arisen, and in this present paper I have 
done my best so to direct their steps that they may walk as worthy 
successors of those whose places in our ranks now know them no 
more. 



ON CINCLIBIUM STYGIUM, Swaktz. 



By Jas. Cash. 

This moss, which is of arctic or sub-arctic type, occurs in this country- 
only in three recor led localities, namely — at Malham, in the West- 
Eiding of Yorkshire ; in the Breadalbane district of Perthshire — on 
Ben Lawers ; and (according to Schimper's Synopsis) at a place called 
Tuddenham Bog, in Suffolk.^ Its natural home is Northern Europe, 
where, particularly in Sweden and Norway, it is said to be abundant. 
It is also found in the Arctic regions, being included, with many other 
British species, in the list of mosses collected by Dr. Lyall during one 
of the expeditions sent out to search for Sir John Franklin. Its 
association with such mosses as Sptachnum Wormskioldii and Mnium 
ht/menophylloides leads us to hope that these and kindred species, as 
yet unknown to us, may also some day be found in Britain. 

Moreover, when we find, in a list of forty-eight arctic mosses, no 
fewer than forty-two which have been recorded as British, the fact 
seems to indicate a very close correspondence between our own moss 
flora and that of regions much further north. 

The history of Cinolidium stygium as a British moss is not a little 
interesting to Lancashire muscologists, especially those who are old 
enough to remember its fortunate discoverer, John Nowell. In 
speaking of Nowell as its discoverer, I merely give utterance to the 
current belief, though, as we shall presently see, Nowell did not, at 
the time of the discovery, do more than share the credit with certain 
muscological acquaintances, namely — John Hanworfch of Lobb Mill, 
and William Greenwood of Lumb Butts. The discovery was made 
in the summer of 1836. When the moss was picked up on the bog 
near Malham Tarn, none of the three could identify it. They were, 
however, acute enough to see that it was a rare thing, and convinced 
themselves by subsequent investigation — apparently before communi- 
cating the moss to any of the experts then living — that it was new to 
the British flora. I cannot say whether they sent specimens for 
identification to anyone besides Mr. Wm. Wilson, who at that time 
(seventeen years before the publication of his " Bryologia Britannica") 
was known throughout England as the best authority on British 
mosses ; but the presumption is that they did not, if we are to judge 

* Since this was written I have ascertained that the moss was found on Ben 
Ledi, in 1864, by the late Mr. McKinlay (this heing the first Scottish locality), 
and that a year or two later it was discovered near Balquhidder, by Mr. 
John Shaw. 



Cash : On Cinclidium stycxIum. 1*51 

by a letter they sent to Mm dated Sept. 12th, 1836. That letter bore 
at the foot the joint signatures of Han worth, Greenwood, and No well 
— (and they appear in the order here given) — a circumstance which 
seems to show that no one claimed priority over the rest. It was the 
first letter, apparently, which had reached Mr. Wilson from the 
Todmorden muscologists, and I have no doubt that Chiclidium styyinm 
was the interesting medium of introduction between No well and 
Wilson, forming the commencement of a lifelong acquaintance, and of 
extensive correspondence on matters muscological. 

The writers intimated to Mr. Wilson the discovery, in the vicinity 
of Malham, Craven, June 13th and 14th — on a very wet bog near 
Malham Tarn, a species of moss which,'' they said, '^appears to us not 
to be described in volume 2nd, part 1, of Hooker's ' Brit. Flora.' " 
The letter at this point bears a memorandum in Mr. Wilson's writing 
giving the name of the moss, Cinclidiimi stygium. The writers enclosed 
specimens of the moss for Mr. Wilson's acceptance, with remarks on 
its general appearance. ^' It has," they said, " much the appearance 
of BrijUiii pimctatum. It was growing along with liypnum scorpioldefi 
and Bryiim dsalbatmn. We will thank you to give us your opinion of 
it, as we think none more competent than you, who have displayed so 
much zeal in collecting and investigating the various species of the 
British musci." 

Mr. Wilson lost no time in communicating the fact of Cinclidirnn 
having been added to the list of British mosses, to his friend Dr. 
W. J. Hooker, then Professor of Botany in the University of Glasgow. 
To the author of the " Muscologia " it was a highly interesting discovery, 
for in the second edition of that work, published in 1827, he had 
included this very moss in the list of Continental species of which, up 
to that time, Great Britain could not boast the possession.* Acknow- 
ledging Mr. Wilson's communication in a letter dated Nov. 28, 1836, 
he says : — *^I am delighted to find that Cinclidirnn dynium has been 
found in Britain, and hope, from what you say, in fruit." In a 
subsequent letter to Mr. Wilson, he wrote : — " I shall be glad to 
obtain specimens of Chiclidiiim. stygixm, and to announce its exact 
habitat." And again, Jan. 2r)th. 1837, not having got the desired 
specimens, he wrote : My dear Sir — I begin to be anxious to hear 
from you again, especially upon the subject of CmcLidnnn dygum^ of 
which I am very desirous, as I scarcely need tell you. to possess 
British specimens. Will you intercede on my behalf with the 

* It is curious to find Dicranum Schraderi, Mnitim turgidum f Aulacomnium 
turgidumj^ aud Bryum squarrosum (Taludella sq.) in the same Hst. 



152 



The Naturalist. 



discoverer, and enable me to obtain specimens ? for I do not yet know 
the name of the lucky individual who detected it." After this, Mr. 
Wilson sent specimens to Dr. Hooker through a friend in Liverpool, 
as, under the postal system then prevailing, it was impossible to send 
them direct. 

Dr. Hooker wrote, on the 15th February, 1837, to Mr. Wilson a 
letter, in which occurs the following passage : — " Thank you for 
having sent to Liverpool for me the Cinclidium. Surely the persons 
who discovered it must be men of some knowledge, and acuteness too ; 
and if so, they deserve to be encouraged.'' 

It is quite certain that the Todmorden worthies received from Mr. 
Wilson the encouragement of which the Glasgow Professor considered 
them so deserving. After receiving his acknowledgment of the 
specimens first sent, they dispatched to him a number of specimens 
for general distribution," and in the letter which accompanied them 
they said : — " Our situation in life (being that of labourers) will not 
admit of us going so far at any time, the distance being nearly forty 
miles from Todmorden." 

At the time of which we write, Hanworth, Greenwood, and Nowell 
seemed to be pursuing their botanical labours jointly, and it is curious 
to see letter after letter with their three signatures at foot. There is 
one dated May 28th, 1837, which though it refers to certain mosses 
besides that which is the subject of this note, I will take the liberty 
of quoting in full : — 

Lobb Mill, May 28th, 1837. 
" Dear Sir— We received your valuable communication of the 19th 
November, together with an abundant and interesting supply of rare 
mosses, such as we have long wished to see, and for which we beg you 
will accept our most sincere thanks. 

Our reason for troubling you again so early is, that you desired 
directions to the spot where we found our Cinclidium, which will be best 
found (if you start from Malham) by going directly to the place where 
the water discharges itself from the Tarn ; then turn to your right in the 
direction towards Gordale. The distance, we think, where it grows is 
not above a quarter of a mile from the bye-wash, in a hollow place on 
the moor, on which grow Carex teretiuscula and Menyanthes trifoliata, 
which we think will not fail to attract your attention. 

We thank you very kindly for your remarks on Hypnum flagellare, 
which is far from being uncommon with us, growing in nearly all the 
ravines or Clough holes, but the fruit is always rare. Leucodon we have 
not yet found near Todmorden. Encalypta streptomrpa we found on an 
old wall near Bolton Bridge, Wharfedale, April, 1835. Hypnum rugulo- 
sum we found in Gordale Scar, near Malham. 



Cash : On Cinclidium stygium. 



153 



" We take the liberty to enclose a few specimens which we are not just 
satisfied about. No. 1 is what we had named Grimmia ovata at the time 
we made our list. We found it only in small quantities, and the fruit 
was very young. We have found it in a better state since. We think it 
does not agree with your specimens of G. ovata ; perhaps it is the G, 
Doniana. [Mr. Wilson makes a note that it is this latter species.] We 
hope you will forgive us disappointing your expectations. No. 2 is that 
which we had named Pterogonium gracile, but we find that it does not 
agree witli your specimens of that plant. We have never seen it in fruit, 
but we think the leaves — at least some of them — are two-nerved at the 
base. [Mr. Wilson's note is that this moss is Hyp. catenulatum ; some 
of the leaves were two-nerved.] No. 3 we have thought was Trichosto- 
mum microearpunij [Mr. Wilson writes Not so "] but the capsules 
appear rather cylindrical in shape. No. 5 we have thought was Didy- 
modon flexifolium [which Mr. Wilson confirms], but we have not seen it 
in fruit. No. 6 is what we have called Didymodon rigidulum — [perhaps 
an aquatic variety — W.], but you will see that the capsules are cylindrical. 
No. 8 we think may be Byp. albicans — Probably "], but we have not 
seen it in fruit. No. 9 is what we have named Hyp. murale — [i?. con- 
fertum], but we think that the leaves are serrated. 

Perhaps you will think that we are taking too much liberty in pre- 
senting these specimens in their present condition, but we trust that you 
will excuse us, as we have no other person to apply to for information on 
this subject ; and should we ever be able to render you any service in 
procuring for you any plants in our vicinity, we shall ever feel happy to 
do so. 

" We remain, yours truly, 

"John Hanwokth. 

William Greenwood. 
" John Nowell." 

In a P.S. the writers ask for exact directions to fFeissia tricJiodes 
(Brachyodm trickodes), near Littleborough. 

I do not know what became of Hanworth and Greenwood, but 
Nowell continued to correspond with Wilson, and in a letter dated 
October, 1838, he wrote : — I have the pleasure to inform you that 
this summer I have had a botanical ramble to Malham and Ingle- 
borough. I found Cinclidium dygium in considerable plenty in the 
station on Malham Moor ; but unfortunately the finest of the fruit had 
been eaten off by something, so that I did not got very many specimens 
in fruit ; but I got a good supply in a barren state. I find the Hyp. 
ruguhsum in two or three places in the neighbourhood of Malham, but 
not in plenty. I found TFeissia pusilla {Seligeria pmilld) on shady 
rocks in Gordale, and also on Ingleborough, but very sparingly. The 
following I found in Ingleborough : — Tdraplodon muioides (very rare), 



154 



The Naturalist. 



Encalypta rJiabdocarpa (abundant), DisticMum capillacfum (in fr.), Bar- 
tramia gracilis (rare), Leskea moniliformis (barren), Bryum. Zmrii (fr. 
very rare), Mnium serraimm (rare), Amblyodon dealbatus. This I also 
found in wet places, near Settle, but very sparingly." In a P.S. he 
adds — " I have found Weissia trichodes in several places in the neigh- 
bourhood of Todmorden, but not common ; I have also found Grimmia 
saxicola \^Ca7npylostelium) in Eamsden Clough, near Todmorden. The 
place where Cinclidium stygium grows on Malham Moor is not above 
500 yards from the outlet of the Tarn, in the direction towards 
Gordale." 

Such is the early history of this interesting moss, in Britain. It 
still grows in the bog at Malham, and, from the accounts given of its 
condition and abundance by our friend Mr. Cunliffe, who gathered it 
so lately as in 1880, it is likely to grace this its first English 
habitat for many a long year to come. 

Cinclidium stygium. — I see, in the April No. of the Naturalist^ that 
you will print next month a paper on the history of Cinclidium stygium, 
I think it probable I may be able to give some additional information. 
I was with Mr. E. Skipper, editor of the " Suffolk Flora," when he 
discovered the moss growing in a small bog at Tuddenham, near Bury 
St. Edmund's, Suffolk. It was in November, 1860, that we met with 
it, but from its habitat supposed it a Mnium. Mr. Skipper, however, 
sent a piece to Mr. John Nowell, of Todmorden, who at once replied 
it was Cinclidium stygium. In that month, and in the November of 
1862, Mr. S. found it beautifully in fruit and in good condition, 
though earlier in the year (September) the fruit was quite immature. 
I know he sent specimens to a good many botanists — among others, to 
Mr. Wilson. It was thus, probably, that Dr. Schimper was aware of 
this locality. — E. N. Bloomfield, Guestling Eectory, near Hastings, 
April 14th. 



Arrival of Migrants in Hyburn Yalley. — Willow wren April 2nd, 
swallow, 13th ; martin, 17th ; sand-martin, l7th ; Ray's wagtail 17th ; 
Sandpiper, April 19th.— F. G. S. Rawson. 

Economic Entomology. — Having been elected by the Y.N.U. as the 
recorder of Economic Entomology for the county, I appeal to the mem- 
bers, and to all • naturalists who are not members but resident in the 
county, to help forward this desirable work, by forwarding me notes or 
specimens, or both, of any kind of insect ravages which may come under 
their notice. With the help of the members of the Union this might be 



Short Notes and Queries. 



155 



made one of the most important items in the Union's work, but without 
such help I shall be able to do very little. I particularly solicit commu- 
cations on all insects found to be injurious to field or garden crops, such 
as daddy-longlegs, turnip flea, beetle, aphides, wireworms, larvae of 
various kinds, &c. ; also notes of any remedies wrhich have been found 
serviceable — either artificial, as chemical dressings, or natural, as the 
counter-action of other insects, insectiverous birds, &c. Such notes, 
however small, will be of great service in drawing up a report at the end 
of the year, which probably will be sent free to all who help forward the 
work by rendering assistance. I would also ask that readers of the 
Naturalist should call the attention of horticultural and agricultural 
societies to the fact of such appointment. It will be my duty to forward 
advice upon the best known and most simple remedies to persons seeking 
that advice, but such communications must always be accompanied by 
specimens of the insects, and of the injuries done by them, and any 
notes or information relating to the same. JMiss E. A. Ormerod, F.M.S., 
has kindly ofiered to assist me upon the more difficult points. Besides 
the information asked for above, I should also be glad of such as relates 
to any kind of insect ravages, either to stored grain, grocery stores, 
clothing, or any which directly or indirectly afiect the interests of man. — 
S. L. MosLEY, Beaumont Park, Huddersfield. 

Foumart (Mnstela pntorius) in Yorkshire. — Eight years since, a 
foumart was seen running across a field at Three Nuns, Kirklees, and 
shortly after, one was caught in Strangsty Wood, Elland, by Roland 
Brook, probably the same animal. Seven years ago B. Sykes, contractor, 
Bishworth, trapped a fine specimen, but has not heard of any in that 
locality since. The keeper over Clowes Moor informs me that in the 
winter of 1861-2 he and his father trapped three foumarts ; and fourteen 
years since in December, he traced one in the snow across Cud worth 
pastures, which join up to Clowes Moor, and following the trail, he came 
up with a shepherd and his dog just giving the coup de grace to a fine dog 
or male foumart. The next (and last) instance occurred five years ago, 
when he trapped one on the moors shot over by Messrs. Whitehead, of 
the Boyal George Mills, Greenfield. During the winter last past, the 
keepers have captured four stoats or ermines, one a beautiful variety, 
marked with red stripes. In 1854 two local men caught a pine or beech 
marten {Martes foina), at Romfolly, near Hebden Bridge ; it measured 
2ft. Gin. from tip to tip, and had a splendid fur. It was kept in a cage at 
a public-house, and was exhibited to visitors. — C. C. Hanson. 

Additional Wensleydale Shell-Notes. — I have now to record that, 
as Mr. J. W. Taylor informs me, the specimens of Helix rufescms which 
Mr. Bobert Scharfi" collected at Hardraw Scar appertain to the variety 
ruhens — a variety which has, as yet, not been recorded for Britain in a 
formal manner. Mr. H. Pollard gives me Hawes as an additional 
locality for fi. rapesiris ; and Mr. James Ingleby lately sent me 



156 



The Naturalist. 



specimens of Limncea peregra from Coverdale, which he found in damp 
grass in swampy places near the river. — Wm. Denison Roebuck, Leeds. 

Leptoscyphus interruptus (Nees). — This very rare hepatic has lately 
been found in Cheedale, Derbyshire, by Mr. G. A. Holt, of Manchester. 
In Dr. Carrington's British Hepaticse," no mention is made of any 
locality in Derbyshire for this species ; it is, however, given in the 
London Catalogue of British Mosses and Hepatics " for province 8, which 
includes Derbyshire. Can any reader say if this species has previously 
been found in Derbyshire, and where ? or is Mr. Holt's discovery new to 
the county 1 — W. H. P. Since sending the above, with reference to 
Leptoscyphus interruptus (Nees), 1 find that it is recorded in Synopsis 
Hepaticarum," (1844). In Anglia (Matlock, Derbyshire), leg., W. 
Wilson."— W. H. P. 

l^hizomorpha suhcorticalis in Yorkshire. — Mr. C. C. Hanson, of West 
Yale, has sent us a curious specimen of fungoid vegetation to be named. 
He writes us that he found it ''on stripping the bark off a dead maple 
tree ; it was between the bark and the wood, but adhering to the wood, 
on which it left a beautiful imprint, and was many yards in length." 
Being unable to name it ourselves, we sent it to Mr. J. G. Baker, F.R.S., 
of Kew Herbarium, who determines it to be the celebrated Rhizomorpha 
suhcorticalis (see Berkeley's Outlines, p. 42), and that it is an abnormal 
condition of the mycelium of various species of fungi of the genera Poly- 
porus and Xylaria, vegetating under the bark. In Sir J. E. Smith's 
Eng. Flora, by Sir W. J. Hooker, vol. v. pt. 2, p. 235, it is referred to 
Xylaria (Sphceria) Hypoxylon^ where it is further remarked — ''though, 
as Fries observes, every production so named is not to be referred to this 
species. Withering long ago perceived the connection. The editor of 
the last edition is, however, most probably wrong in referring it to 
Bh, imperialis. I perfectly agree with that most judicious author, 
M. Fries, as to the desirableness of excluding from the list of fungi all 
such doubtful productions. Nothing, however, can be more interesting, 
and, as regards the physiology of these plants, more instructive, than the 
correct reference of such abortive forms to the perfect species." — We 
should be glad to learn whether any other observer has come across any 
specimens of this curious production, and under what circumstances. — 
C. P. H. 

NOTICES OF BOOKS.—" On Cephalozia (a genus of Hepaticse) : 
its Sub-genera and some Allied Genera : By Richard Spruce, Malton. — 
Printed for the Anther, 1882." — This, the latest work of a distinguished 
naturalist and explorer, will be studied intently by all who are interested 
in the Hepaticse, for in it are given some of the results of many years of 
careful observation in difierent parts of the world : whether in the woods, 
dales and heaths of his native county ; or in the South of Ireland bota- 
nizing with the late Dr. Taylor ; or rambling in the Pyrenees with his 
friend Dr. Southby ; or alone in the wilds of South America ; supple- 
mented by years of quiet microscopical study, only interrupted by painful 



Short Notes and Queries. 



157 



illness, till of him may appropriately be said 

*' Old experience hath attained 

To something like prophetic strain." 

And so, in addition to other important work, we have this unpretentious 
book with its brown paper back — ^^dear, as books go now," as someone 
remarks, but which we conjecture will soon be difficult to be purchased, 
as only a limited number of copies have been printed. In it we find, as 
far as we can judge, food for future years, for no superficial study can 
grasp the large questions which are raised by the author, and a conscien- 
tious student must feel that before he can accept or reject the author's 
conclusions, he must have a wide and clear knowledge of the plants in 
question. Here are shown that characters used by other systematists are 
unreliable, and systems so based are shaken or overthrown by the 
author's genera reduced in rank, species reduced into varieties, &c., jfec. 
Fortunately the author is not one of those iconoclasts who pull down a 
system and have nothing to set up in its place, for we find here outlines 
of a natural arrangement, supported by scientific illustrations, and indi- 
cations and suggestions of affinities — some perhaps bold, as, for instance, 
when sketching the affinities of several genera he states that we shall 
probably find with every tribe a genus having pouched fruit — which, if 
not found hitherto, has either escaped our notice, or, being weaker than 
other plants, has succumbed to them in the struggle for place, or has not 
yet been evolved. It would be difficult to indicate, in the short space at 
our disposal, the affinities pointed out and the systems suggested, with an 
account of the characters upon which the author bases his conclusions ; 
suffice to mention that the mode of insertion of the branches on the stem, 
the origin and structure of the angles of the perianth, the structure of the 
walls of the capsule, and the number of the sexual organs, are the 
author's leading characters ; and in this memoir is the method proposed 
by him well demonstrated. Several new genera are proposed by him : 
one to contain the J ung. albescens of Hooker, another the two new species 
of Dr. Carrington, Jimg. myriocarpa and Jung, Nevicensis. The species 
peculiar to our flora are all fully elucidated and described, and as they 
are amongst the most perplexing of any in the tribe Jungerma7iiaceo3y all 
British hepaticologists are under obligation to the author for making 
these the special object of his study. Several new additions to our flora 
are made : Cephalozia heterostipa, Carr. , et Spruce, which may be lying 
hidden in many herbaria as an alpine form of Jung, inflata, Huds., with 
which it has some points in common, but is distinguished by its postical 
branches, some flagelliform, the presence of stipules, and difierent 
perianth ; Cephalozia leucantha, S., found by J. Sim on rotten wood 
near Banchory, Scotland — a species previously found by Continental 
botanists in similar localities, but confounded by them with Cephalozia 
catenulata (Huben. ) from which it is quite distinct, being of a paler color, 
leaves of a different shape, &c. Cephalozia aeraria, Pears., found about 
the mouths of old copper mines in Wales is a small species distinguished 



158 



The Naturalist. 



from Cephalozia divaricata by its inflorescence being on lateral branches, 
its uncinate leaves, and other characters. A species which had erroneously- 
been looked upon as a form of Cephalozia connivens (Dicks.), is named by 
the author Cephalozia multiflora, and from the full description given, there 
will be no difficulty in determining the Cephalozia mnltijiora of Spruce, 
whatever there may be of the Cephalozia midtiflora of other authors. 
Several species only previously announced as British, are fully described 
by the author, and their stations given. The book can be obtained from 
Mr. J. W. Slater, Malton, or Mr. Wesley, Essex-st. , Strand, London, 6/- 



fiainfall for P^m^. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
1-20 


14 


8-60 


*7-86 


7 


0-30 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Eawson) 


365 


1-50 


17 


13-20 


14-04 


19 


0-35 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


0-52 


18 


6-26 


t4-84 


19 


0-26 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


1-31 


14 


719 


J7-14 


19 


0-40 


Patelet Bridge... (E. War- 
burton, M.R.C.S.. L.S.A.) 


436 


1-62 


13 


10-38 


119-01 


19 


0-37 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


1-39 


15 


7-09 


5-82 


19 


0-42 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


1-36 


21 


11-86 


10-38 


19 


0-42 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


1-59 


13 


8-92 


6-55 


7 


0-42 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25. 


1-29 


15 


5-65 


5-32 


19 


0-30 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10§ 















* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. f Average of 29 years, 1853-62 & 1865-83. 
J Average of 14 years, 1870-83. 
§ No Returns. || For 4 years, 1880-83. 



OBITUARY. — Mr. Roger Earnshaw. — We have to record the 
death of one of our most eminent local botanists, at the age of 53. 
Mr. Earnshaw had been a member of the Ovenden Naturalists' Society 
since its commencement, and was well known as a botanist far beyond 
the limits of his own district. During the existence of the West-Riding 
Consolidated Naturalists' Society he was frequently sent to represent his 
society at their meetings, and was several times called upon to assist in 
naming the specimens collected during the day's ramble, this being 
considered not only an honour, but as a rather severe test of his know- 
ledge of botany. He was one of those humble workers in science who 
seem to be fast dying out — men who loved to spend their time and 
money in the pure desire for knowledge, and who, according to the high 



Hepouts of Societies. 



159 



authority of Prof. Williamson, F.R S., form the life-blood of science," 
for without them no scientific association can flourish. He was, when 
well, full of energy and enthusiasm, of a gentle and peaceful disposition, 
ever ready to help young beginners in the study of botany, and to render 
all the aid he could to the science he loved so well. A kind father, a 
faithful husband, and a tried friend, he has gone to his rest without 
leaving an enemy behind him, and amid the tears and true sorrow of 
numerous relatives and friends. — J. Ogden. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — A summary has been given of the 
remarkable occurrences of the winter season. The most curious or rare 
have been partly recorded, as Richardson's squa, Oct. 27th ; waxwing, 
Dec. 20, by Mr. H. Garland, who obtained another the year before a£ 
same place, Bolton-on-Dearne ; and the Sclavonian grebe, Jan., 1829. 
Several gulls, flocks of wild geese and ducks in the Dearne valley, when 
inundated by the snow floods about Feb. 25th. Thrush, with eggs, noted 
at Swithen March 4th, this rich songster again becoming more plentiful 
there than at Hemsworth, and was heard also at Brighouse April 18th. 
Blackbirds more numerous at Barnsley, increasing slowly after the winter 
of 1880-81. The secretary read letters from magistrates and police officers 
that his application for enforcing the Birds' Protection Act would be 
attended to. Starlings, meadow-pipits, pied wagtails, partially migrating 
in the late frosts, are returning in numbers. The grey wagtail has not yet 
gone to its breeding haunts, the north-west Yorkshire hills. Golden- 
crested wrens, kingfishers, a few herons, a carrion crow, many jays and 
magpies, reported in different parts. Several reports received of swallows 
and other migrants — one swallow as early as April 2nd, another 3rd and 
5th ; cuckoo 10th and ] 3th ; willow warbler and chifichafl" April 8 ; tree 
pipit, 11th. Martins seen by Mr. G. J. Dymond on the I7th at Darfield 
and Parkgate ; redstart and lesser whitethroat near Silkstone. Wheat- 
ear, usually the first visitant — average date March 26th — seen at Woolley 
Edge by Dr. White, Apr. 4th ; a fine stoat taken by Mr. P. Creighton at 
Hemsworth, Feb. 26th. A toad was seen by Mr. J. Dewhirst, of Womb- 
well, in his greenhouse, to cast his black skin and eat it — the new skin 
being of a whitish tint — Feb. 16th. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Mar. 20th, the president 
in the chair. — Dr. W. H. Evans gave a paper on Land and Fresh- 
water Shells," minutely describing their characteristics, mode and 
tenacity of life, habitat, &c. The lecture was illustrated by a large 
number of shells, some of them very rare. Mr. Eastwood exhibited, on 
behalf of Mr. Pudd, a specimen of S. convolvuli, taken at Great Horton 
eight years ago. 

Meeting April 3rd, the president in the chair. — Accounts of rambles 
were given by several members. Mr. Oxley exhibited Eaniinculus 



IGO 



The Naturalist. 



Lenonnandi, in bloom, from Rombalds Moor ; Mr. Soppitt, a species of 
fungus, Dedalcea tmicolor, and Mr. Bennett, bred specimens of *S. carpinL 

Meeting April 17th, the president in the chair. — Mr. F. Bamford gave 
a very interesting paper on ''Coal and its Distribution." Mr. Bennett 
exhibited Planorhis spirorhis from Althorpe, Lincoln ; Mr. Illing worth, a 
number of insects from America ; and Mr. West, mosses and lichens 
from Ingleton. — H. L. O. 

Beverley Field Naturalists' and Scientific Society. — Fortnightly- 
meeting, Apr. 5th. Mr. R. Stuart exhibited a nicely mounted case of 
waxwings, Ampelis garrulusy which were shot last December in Lincoln- 
shire, also a pair of water rails, Rallus aquaticus, shot on the river Hull. 
Eggs of the following species were shown by Mr. J. B. Hood, viz. :— Great 
black-backed gull, Larus marinus ; lesser black-backed gull, L. fuscus ; 
herring gull, L. argentatus ; common gull, L. canus, taken in Scotland ; 
black -headed gull, Chroicocephalus ridihundusy taken at Scotter Moor, 
Lincolnshire ; and the kittiwake gull, Rissa tridactyla, from the cliffs at 
Flamborough. The president, on behalf of Mr. Key, showed a fine 
series of butterflies from Singapore, the large size and beauty of the 
specimens attracting much attention. A collection of British butterflies, 
chiefly taken in the neighbourhood of Beverley, was brought by Mr. R. 
Cherry ; Mr. J. J. Marshall exhibited a large specimen of the fresh- 
water mussel, from Skelton, near York ; and Mr. Butterell a large and 
brilliantly coloured example of the sea mouse. Aphrodite acxdeata, sent 
for exhibition by Mr. Dinsdale, smack-owner, of Hull. It was reported 
by Mr. Swailes that the first summer migrant, a wheatear, Saxicola 
cenanthe, was observed in Westwood on the 1st April. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — Monthly meeting, April, Capt. 
Cunliffe in the chair. — The hon. sec. read notes communicated from Mr. 
J. Martindale, of Kendal, on Gonionema compacUim, Nyl. Mr. J. M. 
Barnes, of Milnthorpe, was elected an honorary member of the society. 
A communication was read by Captain Cunliffe from Mr. Robert de 
Buysson, of Brouet-Yernet, France, who had sent specimens of Grimmia 
arvernica, Phil., for the use of the society. The species has recently 
been discovered as new to Europe, and is fully described in the Revue 
Bryologique " for 1882. Mr. W. H. Pearson exhibited the following rare 
hepatics : — Jamesoniella Carringtoniy Balf., found on Ben Lavigh by 
Messrs. Wild and Holt ; Leptoscyphus interrupta, Nees, found in Chee- 
dale ; and Cephalozia fluitans, Nees, on Carrington Moss, by Mr. Holt. 
Mr. Pearson also exhibited Cephalozia Turneri, found by himself at 
Dolgelly (new to Wales). Hypnnm nitensy from a swamp in Western 
Manitoba, gathered in March last, was exhibited by the secretary. Mr. 
J. Cash read a most interesting paper on Mr. Wm. Wilson's first visit to 
Scotland, 1827, and his first visit to Ireland, 1829-30. It was replete 
with notes made at that time on the discoveries and rare gatherings of 
cryptogams and flowering plants, and included some interesting corres- 
pondence with Hooker, Arnott, Borrer, Harvey, &c. — Thos. Rogers, 
Hon. Sec. 





>TA.TURALIST. PI. vi. 



B. BROWN, 
Publisher, Huddersfield.. 



CADDIS-FLY HUNTING IN 1882. 
By a. H. Swinton. 

My friend Mr. King lias just written to say lie quite envies us south- 
erners in our fine localities for Trichoptera. As chance has it, I have 
just been reading in the Bulletino della Societa Entomologica 
Italiana an interesting account of the pursuit of a Heliocopsyche in a 
watercourse at Atrani, of which the males are as black as the prince 
of Morocco, while the females are garbed in the russet-grey of Nancy ; 
and whose larvse, previous to transformation, have been noticed to seal 
their cases with an operculum, and to anchor them to stones with 
threads of silk. I am quite captivated by the manners of the Helioco- 
psycJie, and feel rejuvenescent as a Nimrod. 

Well, here we are, at the end of June, among the crimson willow 
herbs and the yellow water-lilies of the river Wey Beside the lock stand 
some vine-mantled cottages, and a little wicket takes you on to the 
rustic wooden bridge that spans the eddies. Listen to the pleasant 
gush of the water, and the melodious chirp of the young throstle from 
its cage suspended on the wall : how the bull-frogs of Atrani would 
have fired a volley of Brekakp.^ Jcake^ koax^ koax, hoax, in soft response 
and gratitude. Look how invitingly the roses and currants trail their 
lustrous branches in the darker water. The very place !" you 
exclaim, " for HeliocopsycJie.''^ The forest flies rest idly on the rushes^ 
and desecrate not the sweet sounds and shadows of the afternoon with 
their buzz. Now is your chance for a sweep among the rank grass 
and ropy flowers : the net has hitched on a thorn, and all the boys 
are down upon you — Caught a jack, sir V The Trichoptera flicker 
like moths in a barrel of bran, and you wish the boys and spaniel 
anywhere. Next, some workmen have been rolling in the marsh hay, 
and here is the proprietor arrived to give you a history of their 
misdeeds. Now then for the longhorns. Nothing but the yellow Lepto- 
cerus senilis and the black Leptocerus aterrhnus. My thoughts revert 
to the Trichoptera of Atrani, and something whispers to me, perchance 
there was a time when senilis and aterrimus were one in matrimony. 

Summer is gone, and the scene changes to Glasgow. I am seated 
with my friend, recapitulating my heroic deeds. As he calls the roll 
of the slain, I hear Molanna angustata, Leptocerus cinereiis, Tinodes 
Waencri, Hydropsy die angustipennis^ NeurecUpsis hhnaculata^ Cyrnus 
trimaculatns^ Sisyra terminalis — all from Guildford. Then comes a 
conventional rarity, Setodes notata, only hitherto taken at W eybridge 
N.S., Vol. viii. June, 1883. 



](>2 



The Naturalist. 



and at York, on the meanders of the Onse probably. There is likewise 
an unseasonable occurrence in the fourth monthj provided the Roman 
numeral be not transposed, of an autumnal sort, AnaboUa nmom. 

Being in possession of the titles of our books, let us turn to the 
biography within ; for, without a knowledge of the latter, entomology 
is likely to expire in the mephitic air of the heirloom of verbiage. 
Now, evidently the rarity is either an importation into this country, a 
relic of a state of things that is dying out, or its distribution is 
imperfectly made out ; and the untimely occurrence in the dearth of 
miracles may point to two annual appearances on the Wey. Then as 
to love or strife. Here is a sly and portly PUryganta (jranclis. female I 
believe, who when poked from a slimy crevice of my rustic bridge, was 
as filthily redolent of excrement as any lace wing. Being naturally not 
too particular, I applied a pocket lens at the time, and brought into 
view certain clear drops that were exuding from a scent-pore beneath 
the fourth segment of the abdomen. Another autumnal Trichopteron 
I netted flying near a rivulet in the island of Bute, possessed a piquant 
zest for honey ; its name, I learn, is Anaholia neivo^a. What senti- 
ments can insects associate with aromas to us so opposite ! 

Before taking my leave, I while away a little time looking over my 
friend's collection. I learn that Enoecyla pusilla has an apterous female 
that waddles over the rushes — (and where will you find a tribe of 
insects in which this trace of domesticity is wanting^) — and likewise 
that we have an insular dwarf which attains to great dimensions in 
parts of the Continent, and in Switzerland becomes mottled. The 
first of these peculiarities, in Jsynachm cmiosus^ is by no means 
startling, since the size of a species merely depends on the amount of 
food consumed in the immature or larval form ; and this will depend 
on the climate, annual sunshine, or nature of the food, as may be 
easily made a matter of proof or observation. 

Bin field House, Guildford. 



LOCAL BIRDS OF THE WILSDEN DISTRICT. 

By E. p. p. Butterfield. 

The following list (with a few notes) of some of the scarcer or more 
local birds which breed annually, or which have bred within recent 
years in this district, may be consideoed of sufiicient general interest 
to justify their publication. Such a list, even if but a short one, wall 
better serve as a basis to the ornithologist from which to draw a just 
notion of its avian peculiarities, than a long list of accidental visitors. 



BUTTERFIELD : LoCAL BiRDS OF WiLSDEX DISTRICT. 1G3 



It is now generaliy agreed among ornithologists that, to have a proper 
conception of the avifauna of a country, such stragglers must be 
dismissed from consideration as of doubtful value or but little interest. 
The following observations embody the result of many years' expe- 
rience, and although all error may not be eliminated, I trust that the 
moral element which should aim at making them accurate has not 
been wanting. 

Tawny owl {Strix aluco). — A pair or two breed annually in Bingley 
Wood, or about St. Ives, the seat of W. Ferrand, Esq. I saw a brood 
at dusk one summer's eve, I think in 1881, alight in a sycamore tree 
beneath which I was standing. They had apparently just left the nest 
which had been built, I conjectured, in the crevice of a huge rock 
hard by. 

Pied B.y csitcher {M?iscicapa rdricapilla). — A pair commenced building 
their nest in a beech tree in Bingley Wood, in May, 1881 (see 
Natvralid^ vol. v., p. 171), but from some cause or other they 
discontinued operations — a result I very much deplored. It is an 
exceedingly local bird, and I cannot state on what occult principle it 
selects its breeding quarters, but' doubtless it is connected with its food 
supply. 

Dipper {Chclm aquaMcu>). Breeds not uncommonly every year. 
My brother and I found a nest last spring near Bingley, which was 
built in a hole in some masonry constructed to divert a portion of the 
water of the beck, for the purpose of supplying motive power to drive 
a waterwheel belonging to a mill. Beside the nest my brother found 
a little fish, which we both thought had been brought for the young 
by their parents, but had been accidentally dropped ; and on my 
brother giving it to one of the young, it was bolted with evident 
relish, which is, I think, a presumptive proof of its ichthyologica] 
proclivities, although a great deal has been said and written to the 
contrary. 

Ring ouzel {Turdns torqnatus). — Breeds abundantly in Harden 
Clough, and occasionally on Black-hill. 

Sedge warbler (Sylvia phragmitis). — Although this is regarded as a 
common and generally-distributed bird, it is somewhat scarcer in this 
neighbourhood. It has been, however, commoner these last three 
than the preceding ten years. 

Blackcap (Sylvia atricamlla). — Not so common, and more local than 
its congener, the garden warbler. Its song differs from the latter 
species in being shriller, and performed in a more hurried manner, 
besides lacking compass and melody. 



164 



The Naturalist. 



Wood wren {Sylvia sylvicola). — Common in Bingley Wood and 
Goit Stock Valley, but seems partial to some parts of the wood, and to 
prefer woods of old growth to young plantations. 

Goldcrest {Regulns cristatu.^). — A common bird in winter, though I 
have not succeeded in finding its nest in this locality up to present 
time, but it perhaps breeds occasionally, for I saw a brood in Cot- 
tingley Moor plantation in 1881, which I felt sure had been bred 
there. It however breeds plentifully about Drebley. in Upper Wharfe- 
dale, especially in fir trees of considerable age ; and I cannot assign 
any particular reason why it should not breed here more commonly. 

Cole tit {Panis ater). — Plentiful in winter, but it only occasionally 
remains to breed. 

Marsh tit {Parus palmtris). — Not quite so common in winter as the 
last-named, but a few more remain to breed, although it is by no 
means common in the breeding season. 

Long-tailed tit {Parus caudoius). — Breeds occasionally. I found a 
nest a few years since, built in a holly hedge. It was an exquisite 
piece of workmanship, and greatly excited my admiration. I have 
known of but two nests, neither of which had two holes, as Mr. Selby 
asserts — one for ingress and the other for egress. 

Grey wagtail {Motacilla boarula). — A pair or two breed annually in 
the Goit Stock Valley, particularly near the waterfall, where the ^' dun 
umbrage o'er the fallen stream romantic hangs." Here it is at home, 
consorting with the dipper. 

Ray's wagtail. — This is one of the species that seems to have a 
penchant for certain localities in which to breed — returning year after 
year, as I have known it, to nest about a particular slope of a meadow 
field, or more often in clayey fallow or cornfields, especially where 
coltsfoot grows, under the leaves of which I have frequently found its 
nest. 

Hawfinch {Fringilla coccoihraustes). — A pair bred in the neighbour- 
hood of Bingley in the year 1878. 

Lesser redpoll. — Breeds plentifully about Many wells and Cottingley 
Moor plantation. 

Twite {Fringilla montivm). — Common on the high moors in the 
district, particularly about Denholme, where it breeds in great 
numbers. It occasionally breeds near the village. 

Bullfinch {Loxia pyrrhda). — One of Mr. Ferrand's gamekeepers 
tells me a pair breed about St. Ives nearly every year. It used to 



BUTTEKFIELD ! LoCAL BiRDS OF WiLSBEN DISTRICT. 



1G5 



breed about here more commonly. A few come to feed on elderberries 
every autumn on Blackhills. 

Spotted woodpecker {Picus major). — A pair has bred in Bingley 
wood for two or three j^ears successively. I believe it leaves this 
locality in autumn, returning in February. 

Creeper {Certhia familiaris). — Common in winter, but very rarely 
remains to breed. It is an interesting sight, and one which never 
palls upon my sense from its frequent repetition, to see it busily 
engaged, running up the trunks of trees, in search of food. It is 
almost invariably in company with titmice in winter. 

Kingfisher [Jlcedo ispida). — It is not so common in summer as it 
formerly was. I found a nest containing young in the Goit Stock 
Valley a few years ago, but have not found one since. 

Nightjar {Cop-imulgm europoeus). — Breeds on Blackhills every year. 
I once found two young nightjars in Cottingley Moor plantation, and 
it was quite obvious they had been hatched in the place where I found 
them, although there was not a trace of a nest, not even a slight 
depression in the ground, and judging from the relative sizes of the 
young birds, one of them must have been hatched fully a week before 
the other. 

Stock dove {Columba jEnas). — Several pairs breed about Mr. 
Ferrand's estate every year. My brother and I found a nest in March, 
1881, at the old ruins in Bingley Wood, which we at first mistook for 
the nest of a ring dove. During the same summer we got very near a 
pair, without at all disturbing them, in Bingley Wood. 

Common sandpiper {Totanus hypoleucob). — About the Many wells 
reservoir, a pair, and sometimes two, may be seen every summer. I 
shall never forget my first flushing an old bird from its nest. It 
rollicked and tumbled about in front of me, pretended to be incapable 
of flying, and screamed so piteously that it was with some difficulty I 
restrained myself from giving it a chase, although I knew it was all 
a pious fraud." Usually it is strictly terrestrial in its habits, yet one 
which I saw in the Goit Stock Valley, a few years since, could perch on 
trees with great facility, and should exigency require, it will betake 
itself to water and swim with apparent ease, as I once witnessed one 
which had been disabled with a gun-shot wound, plunge into the river 
Wharf ft to elude its pursuers, and swim to a point beyond the middle, 
when, upon seeing my brother and I on the opposite bank, it turned 
round and swam again to the left bank, where it remained concealed 
amongst the tangled mass of roots. 



166 



The Naturalist. 



Common snipe {Scolopax gallinayo), — Breeds not uncommonly about 
marshy places in the immediate neighbourhood, but more frequently 
about our moorlands bogs. 

In referring to the foregoing list, it will be seen at a glance from 
what we know of the habits of the birds contained therein, that the 
district to w^hich the notes apply is of an elevated or sub-alpine 
character. 



NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 

( Contmued. ) 
By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

I AM dwelling somewhat lengthily upon the Mimosas, for they took 
a strong hold of my first impressions." Their blossoms* are power- 
fully alluring to vast swarms of insects, and a sunny day amongst them 
is as a night, wind due west, spent amongst the sallow catkins, haunts 
of revelling Noctuas at home. 1 give an example. At Fort Beaufort, 
the other day, from one solitary tree I bottled four specimens com- 
prising three species of Longhorn beetles, three species Buprestis, two 
Chrysomelas, and eight Cetonias (amongst the latter a few Aulica), all 
different species. Besides these there were hosts of butterflies, chiefly 
Lycaena, and other inebriates. This bush flourished on the town-side 
of the river Kat. I crossed the bridge, and tramping miles of country 
with limited success, returned to find the scene of early happiness 
bright and glittering in Entomon splendours, and encircled by a million 
winged fairies whose musical instruments agreeing in difference, 
appeared to produce one humming note. 

The Batrachians are a curious group of creatures here, but it was 
upon the Mimosa I saw for the first time my trusty little friend the 
tree-frog Hyperolius [Rappia) Horslockii^ which Mr. Trimen informs 
me occurs in many parts of South Africa, and also in Madagascar. 
You may be acquainted with the European Arborea ; you may know 
that the tree-frog exhibits a dual capacity for adherence : first, the toes 
terminate in distended, rounded, flattened fashion, and are naturally 
endowed with a remarkable viscidity, as I shall prove ; second, the 
abdomen is blessed in means to a similar end," being capable of 
glandular depression or expansion. The hind-legs are very long, and 
trustworthy as propellers or jumpers. I brought home the specimen 
referred to, and placed it on my table, intending to " spirit " him away 

* They give forth a delicious fragrance. Sugaring does not pay during the 
period of bloom. 



Bairstow : Natural His":oRy Notes — South Africa. 167 

speedily, when lo ! and behold ! the torpid imp of insignificance, with 

ne'er a hint or caution, 

But, with mien of 'scaping thief, he jump'd right on my cabinet door, 
Squatted on a glazed window that beautifies my cabinet door, 
Jump'd, and squat, and nothing more. 

— in other words, he leaped at one bound from my table-top on to the 

glass of my cabinet door — a distance of four good yards. I was much 

amused to see how pat " he deposited himself, not screwing and 

twisting about to ensure comfort, like a dog. Several ladies who were 

in the room at this moment also leaped out of the room. 

In my first ramble I was gratified in securing a fine specimen of one 
of the Neuroptera, with long linear hind-wings over twice the length 
of its body. One might be excused for mistaking it for a Dipteron 
with prolonged poisers. Another insect was a stranger to me — one of 
the peculiar antennae-clubbed Neuroptera, belonging, I think, to the 
genus AscalapJius. It is a most voracious creature. 

Another fly^' — a dark, murderous blood-sucking rascal of about an 
inch long —was common, humming about, sounding death-knells to 
victims. He is a terrible fellow, and will attack a lovely AntJiocaris 
with as little compunction as a brother of his own order. I have often 
watched him pretending to snooze at rest on a rock, then pouncing,f 
running, or flying in a direct way upon an innocent fly. A large 
species of Ophiou frequents low bushes. Iphiolax (and doubtless 
Fiplo) is represented by many and beautifully variegated species. I 
should imagine Vollenhoven's surmise that these genera may be 
accounted exotic was perfectly accurate. They include various inter- 
esting Ichneumons. Chrysids I do not consider numerous, and saw- 
flies require much patient hard work. Glancing momentarily into the 
world of Hymenoptera, consolidating a grand majority of Ichneumons 
within a restricted area, those having dusky wings of indefinite visible 
neuration and interlacing, predominate. The same perhaps may be 
said of the bees, wasps, &c. There are black wing-forms, blotchy 
black, apically black, but the transparent forms bring up the rear. 
Unless, therefore, large series of specimens are compared, we cannot 
readily determine them. All the more diflicult are they to recognise 
on the wing. 

The following list of butterflies completes my first day's observa- 
tions : — Pieris HfiUlca^\ P. gidica^ P. charina^ Anthocaris achine^ CoUas 
electra^\ Banah chn/upvus^ Pyy^nmeh cardui^ Erehia sabaciis (n. sp.j, 

* Dipteron — most likely one of the Asilidce. 
t The legs are admirably provided with bristles for "gripping." 
X These were the commonest butterflies. 



168 



The Na^turalist. 



Chtysoplanus lara^ Zeritis cltrysaor^ Z. perlon, Z. tJiyra, Pyrgus elinay 
and several other species I failed to identify. I am quite astray 
amongst the Mantidee. They are quite foreign to me, but the yellow 
forms appear to mimic the plants which they frequent, even as do 
the yellow spiders and others. Of the Cicadae and Arachnidse I shall 
speak later on. 

My premier and sweeping impression of faunal characteristics was 
one pertaining to philosophy or sentiment. It was this : " How grand 
are the provisions which Nature ordains for such frail creatures as 
insects ! " I might adapt the same inference with reference to the 
higher animals. She uses her blessings with admirable discretion, 
and those who study utility " have a giant task alone to discover the 
organs of defence and agression, and the means whereby the sexes are 
attracted. The task grows big indeed when we peer into the maze 
of Nature's creative purposes, and method of dovetailing this to 
that. 

Altogether, I wrote down my first ramble " profitable," and of 
course I include the fine-feeling romances in this verdict. 

Now a word or two about an able article which appeared in the 
Entomologist^ some couple of years ago, on the Rhopalocera of Natal. 
It was both gratifying and disappointing. It is pleasing to know that 
we have such an earnest and painstaking naturalist in our midst, 
hailing more especially from Afric's garden. I should feel less disap- 
pointed had that article first passed the scrutiny of our meritorious 
curator, Mr. Roland Trimen, of wide reputation as author and gentle- 
man. He it was who sifted the cMris of a scattered literature and 
constructed a firm basis of reference, being assisted ably by the creme 
de la (yt^eme of our Colonial entomologists, and rendering, on all 
occasions, Caesar's due unto (Caesar. Personally, I should no more 
think of registering a new take unless it were submitted to Mr. Trimen 
than should I think of penning these words minus my fingers. Had 
not the article referred to commenced with the following paragraph, it 

would never have been touched upon by me : but the List 

{Trime^is) is evidently incomplete, since I have taken several new species 
w.yselfr I ask, what guarantee has the writer that his new species are 
new '? I ask, is there such a thing as completion or perfection to 
discovery? For my own part, during a short space of time, what with 
home and colonial aid, a long list of new species is speedily metamor- 
phosed, doubt precedes certainty, commonness perhaps rarity ; and, 
indeed, an intimate contact with our unpretending yet well-informed 
colonists, who do not always publish their knowledge to the world, has 



Batrstow : Natural History Notes— South Africa. 1G9 

gone far in proclaiming my own impoverishment. As Miss E. A. 
Ormerod very tersely puts it (and especially is this desirable in our 
Colonies), the chief thing seems to me, to have a centre that cares for 
the surroundings.'* Mr. Trimen, therefore, I regard as the centre of 
butterfly lore, not self-constituted, but acknowledged as the leading 
spirit by all. Considering general beauty, specific variation, diversity 
of form, and structural attractiveness of our insects, taken in order of 
merits, or merits of order, my first impressions give precedence 
respectively as follows : — 

Coleoptera. 
Hymenoptera — Diptera. 
Orthoptera. 
Lepidoptera. 
Hemiptera. 
Arachnida. 
Neuroptera. 

A general survey — -casual or concise — from visitor or native, results in 
confirming the appointment of Coleoptera to the first place of honour. 
Aggregating all tl e species which occur in the eastern districts alone, 
from Cape Agulhas to Durban, it might be possible to under-compute 
the whole at a quarter of a million. I do not doubt a collector working 
regularly year by year, would add daily to his list of species. Is it 
not, therefore, singular and lamentable that home entomologists — 
whose advantages are so pronounced — spend their time almost 
exclusively in the treatment and study of threadbare subjects, whilst 
thousands of foreign species remain unworked, unknown, and when 
willing hands of willing entomologists droop from sheer destitution, 
in absence of material aid, and mutual intercourse. Specialists do 
certainly serve their day and generation, but generalists must take the 
lead. In a country like South Africa, conforming to an order or a 
genus means snatching at gold when diamonds surround — another term 
for heartache. Heaping up collections is a secondary affair. Walking 
out of darkness into light precedes. 

I may not bid adieu to the dear old Coleos until I have mentioned 
an early impression relating to protective instinct, or protective 
provisions. Beetles exist capable of ejecting an acidulous secretion as 
an obstacle to, or a means of, ejectment from depredatory enemies. 
Anthia \{)-()uttata beloiigs to these blockaders, and directs its formic 
acid battery with tolerable success, forcible enough to cover long 
distances. Occasionally when my foot has been deposited gently upon 
an enraged captive, the liquid has actually reached my eyes, causing 



170 



The Naturalist. 



a severe smarting sensation of pain, and smelling palpably of nitric 
acid. I could have testified to its identity. It produces likewise a 
similar yellowish effect. Dr. Palmer, of Fort Beaufort, assures me 
that venomous reptiles, and various other vertebrates, discharge formic 
acid- A friend sent to me a singular fish, one of the PlectofinatJii—2i 
species of Tetraoflon^ (Plate vi.), first cousin to Diodofi, referred to by 
Darwin in his Beagle Experiences." The specimen was quite fresh, 
and recently captured. I had it preserved, and the taxidermist told 
me that his venturesome cat, intruding too imprudently within inew- 
seum precincts, bit off forbidden flesh, and biting — died — a poisoned 
thief, Formic acid again, no doubt ! The spines of Tdi^aodon, 
I believe, affected my flesh, and this fact suggested the following 
query to my mind, viz. : — When Tetraodou is inflated, floating help- 
lessly on or near the surface of the sea, does it discharge poisonous 
matter at will for self -protection ? "It fills with air a thin and 
extensive membranous sac, which adheres to the peritoneum the whole 
length of abdomen. When thus inflated it rolls over and floats belly 
upwards, without any power of directing its course." When the tiger 
claw (!) jaws of this peculiar fish are brought to market, they may 
realise a fancy price. 

You will remark Hymenoptera and Diptera in my list are classed 
co-equally, but I omit Formicidae from the former. The ants constitute 
a world unto themselves. An interesting species of Odynerns has often 
arrested my attention. It makes a nest in the stalk of some Ornitlio- 
gcdim^ and continues a recess for concealing or burying carcases of 
larval-slaughtered Diptera. Another species I took, some time ago, 
alive in a mud cocoon of some lepidopterous insects. There was no 
hole of egress. One remarkable wasp — a rarity— deserves special 
treatment. Its body is covered with a soft greyish flavescent pile, 
sparingly distributed, black antennae thickly pectinated, longer than 
thorax, thorax and scutellum deeply rufous, metathorax distinct, 
shapely and tuberous. Abdomen : base of seg. 1 having narrow 
greyish fulvous band, discontinued beneath. Middle of seg. 3 with 
corresponding band, broader, extending around abdomen, narrowing 
on under side. Legs pilose, apical tibial spines conspicuous and 
fulvous. Wings : smoky black, of varying depth, glossy and semi- 
transparent, with dark -blue tinge, obscuring towards disc, and forming 
a distinct dirty band. Fore wdngs having a decided grey streak, 
bisecting radial areola to nerve and continued almost at right angles to 



* Trim en. 



Rainfall for April. 171 

edge of disc, at top of proediscoral areola and irregular triangular spot 
of grey. First humeral clearly defined, pale smoky. Hind wings 
smoky, deeper than in fore, converging from radial to anal margin. 
Probrachial areola pale smoky, very distinct, long ^in. 

' (To he continued.) 



Sainfall for %,^xx\. 





xieigiit 

of 
gauge 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




above 

sea 
level. 


Days 


1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
3-04 


10 


11-64 


^10-05 


28 


0-98 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


2-96 


11 


1616 


19-84 


28 


0-88 


Leeds ... {Alfred Denny)... 


183 


2-85 


13 


911 


t6-69 


28 


0-99 


HORSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


3-46 


11 


10-65 


:9-77 


28 


1-05 


Pateley Bridge... (E. War- 
burton, M.R.C.S.. L.S.A.) 


436 


3-23 


10 


13-61 


§9-98 


28 


1-06 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


3-29 


10 


10-48 


9-35 


28 


1-13 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


3-34 


10 


15-20 


14-41 


28 


0-90 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


3-29 


10 


12-21 


10-52 


28 


1-00 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


2-15 


10 


7*80 


8-68 


29 


0-50 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


1.60 


14 


7.01 


5-75 


19 


0-39 



* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. f Average of 29 years, 1853-62 & 1865-83. 
J Average of 14 years, 1870-83. § For 4 years, 1880-83. 



Natural History Notes from Wharfedale. — The following 
observations were made in Wharfedale during a three days' walk, on 
May 14th, 15th, and 16th, from Ilkley to Grassington and back, taking 
both sides of the river. Birds. — Pied flycatcher : three pairs at Bolton 
Abbey, one pair at Grassington Bridge, one pair at Grass Wood — all in 
song. Goldcrest : one pair in the Lythe, near Grassington, and one pair 
in Grass Wood, in song. Bullfinch : one pair at Grass Wood. Swift : 
numerous at Ilkley on the 14th. Grasshopper warbler : one heard at 
Nessfield. Sandmartin : nests at Ilkley, Burnsall, and other places up 
the river. Lesser whitethroat : one heard at Appletreewick. Nightjar : 
one seen at Grass Wood. Blackcap and garden warbler : in Bolton 
Woods only. Corncrake and chifFchafF not heard. Shells. — Vitrina 
pellucida, Zonites cellarius, Z. alliarhis (Ilkley), Z. nitiduhiSy Z. cristal- 
linus (Burnsall), Helix ai'htstoriim, (type and flavescens), H, nemovalis 



172 



The Naturalist. 



(type, major, and minor), one, three, four, and five-banded — all at Gras- 
sington. Tl . hortensis, five-banded, Grassington ; H. lapicida, very 
common at Grassington on the walls ; ditto, minor (?) ; H. rufescens 
common — one contortion with spire much raised ; ditto alba, Gras- 
sington, on walls ; B. hispida common ; B. sericea and H. aculeata, 
Ilkley ; H. rotundata common everywhere ; H. riipestris on walls at 
Grassington ; Bidimus ohscurus, Ilkley ; Pupa (?) Grassington ; Baleot 
perversa^ Grassington Bridge, on walls ; Clausilia laminata, Ilkley ; (7. 
nigricans common ; ditto duhia, Grassington ; Zua luhrica, var. luhri" 
coides, Ilkley ; Succinea piitris, the Lythe at Grassington ; Limnma peregra, 
Grassington ; Ancylus fluviatilis, ditch at Burnsall ; Cyclostoma elegans, 
on a bank between Grassington and Burnsall, a few yards from the river 
(dead shells) ; Helix cantiana and 77. aspersa, common shells on the 
sandstone — seem to be absent or rare. Mammals. — One shrew Sorex 
araneusj caught near Bolton ; one bat, not identified, caught at Hebden ; 
hedgehog at Grass Wood. Plants. — Lathrcea squam,aria in flower at 
Bolton ; oxlip {Primula elatior) in flower at Barden. — George Roberts, 
Lofthouse, May 18th, 1883. 



Ii^porlg of Socielus, 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — May 8th, Mr. T. Lister, president, 
in the chair. In the Botanical and Entomological Sections not much of 
importance was added to former reports. The list of spring migrants 
nearly completed by the following dates : — Whinchat, reported near 
Wakefield, April 2nd ; Ray's wagtail, 11th ; redstart, 18th ; nightjar, 
16th ; sand martin (in flocks), 22nd ; sedge warbler, 28th ; grass-hopper 
warbler, 30th ; sandpiper, 28th (partial migrant) ; stone-chat, 18th 
(partial migrant) ; land-rail. May 1st (killed by telegraph wire) ; lesser 
whitethroat, first heard May 7th. Several scaup ducks, a few wild geese, 
coots, kingfishers, observed about the pools and streams. — Thomas 
Lister. 

Beverley Field Naturalists' and Scientific Society. — The above 
Society have held a most successful conversazione and exhibition in the 
Norwood Rooms during the week ending 21st April, and we regret that 
space will not permit of a lengthened account of it. The exhibits were 
included under the following heads : — natural history, art and archaeology, 
scientific apparatus, geology and microscopes. Several interesting lectures 
were delivered during the week, including — on the Boulder Clay, by Rev. 

E. M. Cole ; on Coal Gas, by Mr. E. Bryan ; on the Chalk, by Rev. E. 
M. Cole, and on the Wold -dwellers, by Dr. Stephenson. 

Fortnightly Meeting, 3rd May, the president, Mr. J. A. Ridgway, 

F. R.A.S., in the chair. The following presentations to the Society 
were announced, and thanks voted to the donors :~ Three pamph- 
lets, on the White Chalk of Yorkshire," on 'Hhe Red Chalk," 
and ^'^the Origin and Formation of the Wold Dales," by the Rev. R. 



Reports of Societies. 



173 



Maule Cole, M.A., — by the author. A case of sea birds, specially repre- 
senting those breeding in the cliffs at Flambro', by Mr R. Stuart, and a 
fine specimen of coral from America, by Mr. R. Whitton. Mr. Swailes, 
secretary of the Vertebrate section, reported the arrival of the under- 
mentioned migrants : — Wheatear, April 1st, willow-wren, April 6th, 
chiff-chafi" and yellow wagtail, April 7th, swallow, April 12th, tree pipit, 
April 18th, cuckoo, April 24th, lesser whitethroat, April 25th, whinchat, 
April 27th, sedgewarbler, April 29th, sandmartin, April 30th, landrail 
and whitethroat. May 2nd. The specimens exhibited included a robin's 
nest, found near Skidby, and built in an old American meat tin, shown 
by Mr. E.. Ridgway, and a number of crabs brought by Mr. Butterell, 
amongst which weVe ForUimnus holsatns, Portumnus latipes, Eyas 
{•oarctatns, Corydes cassivelaiimts, Cancer pagurns, Carciwis m.oenas, and 
a species of Ehalia. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting March 
19th, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) in the chair. — The attendance 
included several lady visitors. The Rev. S. Fletcher Williams read a 
paper on Louis Agassiz," in which he gave a biographical sketch of the 
life, work, and character of that great naturalist. He alluded particularly 
to his attitude of antagonism to Mr. Darwin, Agassiz throughout main- 
taining a belief in specific creation. During the conversazione which 
followed the lecture, there were exhibited, through the kindness of 
Mr. T. J. Moore, the curator of the Derby Museum, one large and three 
small photographs of Louis Agassiz. Mr. E. Dukinfield Jones exhibited 
four species of Attacus and a drawer of Hesperidce,, collected during his 
residence at St. Paul's, Brazil ; and Mr. J. R. L. Dixon displayed a fine 
specimen of the death's-head moth {Acherontia Atropos), captured at 
Eastham. 

Meeting, April 30th, the president in the chair. — The hon. sec. (Dr. 
J. W. Ellis) was appointed Recorder of Economic Entomology for the 
counties of Lancashire and Cheshire. After the reading of a number of 
communications, Mr. E. D. Fish read a paper entitled Notes on the 
Study of Entomology," in which he recommended the study of the 
mature insect, its habits, its uses, and not only endeavouring to obtain a 
knowledge of what injury it or its larva is capable of causing, but also of 
what benefit it is. He considered utilitarian entomology, in bhis sense, 
the most valuable of all branches of the science. He specially deprecated 
the passing over of minute insects as being of little consequence, believing 
that the smallest objects in animated nature often possess greater power 
for good or evil than larger ones. During the conversazione Mr. Wall 
exhibited Hydrse, ova of water snails undergoing development, <tc. , 
under the microscope. — J. W. Ellis, Hon. Sec. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, — Doncaster, May 14th. — The York- 
shire naturalists opened the season of 1883 on Whit Monday (Easter 
falling very early) at Doncaster, the object being to investigate the 



174 



Thk Naturalist. 



productive entomological localities of Green Farm Wood and Sandal 
Beat, for which permission had been most kindly granted by Capt. Brown, 
Mr. Winter Cockill, and Mr. Councillor Brundell. Parties left Doncaster 
station at 9.15 and 10.15 a.m. for those places, under the charge of 
Messrs. George Tindall and M. H. Stiles. Other parties left at the same 
hours, under the guidance of Mr. J. M. Kirk and Dr. J. Mitchell Wilson, 
for Potteric Carrs ; and bodies of members explored other localities in an 
independent manner, one taking the Gravel Drain and other dykes 
towards the borders of Lincolnshire, and others the old level of Hatfield 
Chase. All these parties, as will be noticed, were designed for the 
exploration of the districts lying east and north-east of the town. For 
the geologists, however, these districts offered no special points of 
interest, and a party was organized under the leadership of Mr. T. H. 
Easterfield, for Balbey, Warmsworth and Conisborough. All parties met 
at tea at 4-30 p.m. , at the Angel Hotel, and afterwards the business of 
the sectional and general meetings was transacted at the Guildhall. At 
the general meeting Mr. J. W. Davis, F.S.A., F.L.S., &c , one of the 
vice-presidents, was voted into the chair. The minutes of the Thirsk 
meeting, last year, were read by Mr. Wrigglesworth (who, in the absence 
of Mr. Clarke, assisted Mr. Poebuck in discharging the duties of the 
secretariate), and confirmed. The roll of the 38 societies in the Union 
being called over, it was found that the following 20 were represented : — 
Barnsley, Bradford (3), Dewsbury, Doncaster, Driffield, Elland-cum- 
Greetland, Goole, Halifax, Huddersfield (2), Hull, Leeds (3), Ovenden, 
Sheffield, Wakefield, and York St. Thomas. Of individual members the 
attendance was about 60 or 70. Two new societies — the Bradford Micro- 
scopical Society, 61 members, and Rotberham Naturalists' Society, 63 
members — and three new members — Mr. P. W. Kendall of Selby, Mr. 
P. W. Dawson of Hull, and Mr. H. S. Ward of Bradford, — were elected, 
A vote of thanks was then proposed by Mr. C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S. , of 
Huddersfield, and seconded by Mr. Thomas Lister of Barnsley, and 
unanimously adopted, to Capt. Brown, Mr. Winter Cockill, Mr. Coun. 
Brundell, Mr. Senior, Mr. Gibson, Mr. Dearden, and Messrs. Crawshaw 
and Son, for permission to visit their respective estates or works, and to 
the Doncaster Microscopical Society and its members for their co- 
operation and assistance. The reports of the sections were then taken. 
Mr. Thomas Lister of Barnsley, who had presided over the Vertebrate 
Section, with Mr. Thomas Bunker of Goole acting for the secretary (in 
the absence of both the sectional officers) stated that 17 summer migrants 
and 28 resident birds had been noted, and also four mammals, no reptiles, 
three amphibians, and four fishes. The migrant birds were — the white- 
throat, sedge warbler, swift (numerous), swallow, martin, landrail, 
whinchat, willow warbler, wood warbler, blackcap warbler, tree pipit 
(numerous), chiff'chafi^, cuckoo (abundant), yellow or Ray's wagtail, 
nightingale, and spotted flycatcher (seen by Mr. Bunker on the btjrders 
of Hatfield Chase). The residents were the skylark, meadow pipit, 



Reports of Societikb. 175 

cliaffincli (numerous, and nesting), starling, wren, jay, marsh tit, grey tit, 
blue tit, hedge accentor, rook, lapwing, linnet, sparrow, yellow-hammer, 
bunting, black-headed bunting, redshank, curlew, partridge, pheasant, 
robin (nest and six eggs), greenfinch, song thrush, missel thrush, black- 
bird, greater spotted woodpecker (one given to Mr. Bunker which had 
been taken out of a jay-trap in one of the woods), and blackheaded gull. 
The other animals were the rabbit, squirrel, mole and hedgehog, frog, 
smooth newt a.nd great-crested newt, eel, loach, pike, and stickleback. 
The Kev. W. 0. Hey, M.A., of York, president of the Conchological 
Section, reported that land mollusca had been very meagrely represented, 
and that the fresh-water mollusca had been collected partly in Potter'c 
Carrs, and partly in the river Torne and the Gravel Drain. Thirty-four 
species had been noted — 21 freshwater and 13 land-shells, viz. : — 
Fisidium pusillum, Bytliinia tentaculata, B. Leachii, Valvata j^iscinalis, 
Planorhis albus (Gravel Drain only), P. vortex, P. spirorbis, P. carinatus, 
P. com.plandUis, P, corneus, P. contortns, Physa fontinalis, P. hypnorum, 
Limncea pevegra (also its varieties ovata, acuminata, and obloiiga, the two 
latter near Blaxton Grange), L. auricnlaria (river Torne), L. stagnalis, 
L, palnstris, Avion hortensis, Limax agrestis, Succinea pntris (Potteric 
Carrs), 8. elegans (Blaxton Grange), Vitrina pellncida, Zonites olliarins, 
Z, crystallinus (Gsmtley) Z. f idvns (Cantley), Helix hispida, H. nemoraliR, 
Vertigo pusilla^ V. edentula (the last two in Cantley Park) and Zna lubrica. 
For the Entomological Section both its officers reported. The president, 
Mr. G. T. Porritt, F.L.S., reported, upon the lepidoptera, that but few 
species had been observed, owing doubtless to the recent long-continued 
east winds. Larvae of Geometra 2^ctpilionaria and CJteiniatobia borcata 
were beaten from the birches in Green Farm Wood, whilst searching for 
larvae of PJujcis betulella ; this latter species is usually common in the 
wood at this time, but probably had not yet begun feeding this late 
spring. Mr. Porritt's remarks were supplemented by Mr. Geo. Tindall, 
of Doncaster, who had acted as leader during the day. Mr. E. B. 
Wrigglesworth, of Wakefield, and the Pev. W. C. Hey, M.A., of York, 
reported the following coleoptera as having been taken, among many 
other species : — Sylpha rugosa, S. thoracica, and JS. atrata, Necrophorvs 
rusphata and N. nnmata, Apion violaceum, A. miniaturn, Ciomis blat- 
tarice, Pterostichus vulgaris, Tima,rchia laevigata, and five species of 
Coccinellidce - all in the Sandal Beat and Green Farm Woods ; and the 
following from Potteric Carrs : — Dytiscus 7nargi7icdis, C, fuscus, Ihjbivs 
uter, Agabus Stnrmii and A. bipustulatus, Hydroporus lepidus, E. dorsalis, 
H. reticnlatus, H. pictus, II. angustatus, Haliplus ruficollis, Hydrobins 
fuscipes, Aphodius prodromus, AncJiomenus prasinus, Pterostichus madidi's 
and P. vulgaris, Phoedon tumidulus, &c., &c. Hymenoptera and 
hemiptera were also plentiful, but the latter mostly in immature stages. 
For the Botanical Section, Mr. P. F. Lee, of Dewsbury, secretary, 
reported upon the flowering plants, and Mr. Wm. West, of Bradford, 
upon the cryptogams. About 30 species of mosses were collected, among 



17(3 



The Natukaltrt, 



which were Fogonatum namun, Fhascum snhnlatnm, Ortliotrichnm diapha- 
wim, and Barhula Hornschuchiana. Hepaticae were not abundant, only 
six species being collected, the best being some tine examples of 
Marchantia polymorpha from Hatfield Chase. Lichens were conspicu- 
ously absent, even Farmelia physodes was scarce. Fungi were not much 
sought after, and only about 15 species were noticed, including Morchella 
esculenta, Feziza venosa, u^cidrnm violce, JS. menthce, and JE, ranun- 
cnlacearum, also the /le^ero-plant, described in the Naturalist last 
month as Ehizomorpha subcoHicalis. Many algse were collected, but 
few have been examined as yet ; ISpirogyra crassa was amongst them. 
For the Geological Section, Mr. J. W. Davis, its president, asked Mr. 
T. H. Easterfield, of Doncaster— who had been cicerone during the day 
—to report : he thereupon stated that the party under his charge had 
started from Doncaster for Messrs. Gibson and Dearden's brick-works, 
at Balby, inspecting the red sandstone quarry on the opposite side of the 
road. The brickworks are in a thick bed of glacial tile and clay, said to 
be 60 feet in thickness, resting on red sandstone. The base is not 
exposed, but about 30 to 35 feet are worked. It has the usual tough 
character, and contains a large number of ice-scratched stones, mostly 
from the coal measures ; one or two being found, however, which appear 
to have travelled a long distance. About four or five feet from the 
present base of the works, and about 20 or 25 feet from the surface of 
the ground there is an apparent division into an upper and lower glacial 
deposit ; the division of the two being marked by the smoothness of the 
surface of the lower bed, as though it had been ground off and polished 
by the succeeding glacier. Above part of the quarry or pit, a reddish 
tile has been worked, which contains large masses of gypsum, but 
comparatively few other stones. Indiscriminately dispersed amongst 
the clays are beds of sand, lenticular in form and small in size. Having 
examined the glacial beds at Balby, the party visited the railway cutting, 
for the line between Doncaster and Conisborough, and noticed the upper 
magnesian, or Brotherton limestone at the eastern end of the cutting, 
succeeded by the middle marls and the lower limestones, well shown at 
Levitt Hagg. Thence along the picturesque banks of the river Don to 
Conisborough, where the sections exposed at the fire-brick works and 
beneath Conisborough Castle exhibited the junction of the coal 
measures and the permian limestone series. Mr. C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S , 
of Huddersfield, then exhibited a fine specimen of the so-called Ehizo- 
morpha suhcorticalis (an abnormal state of the mycelium of a fungus — 
Folyporus) which he had detached from a dead birch in Green J'arm 
Wood, and made some remarks upon it. He then called upon Dr. 
Burman to move, and Dr. J. Mitchell to second, the adoption of a 
vote of thanks to the chairman. This was agreed to, and the proceedings 
came to an end. — It should be stated that Mr. Winter Cockill very 
hospitably entertained the party visiting his district to luncheon, at 
about 2 p.m.— W.D.R 



A LIST OF THE FERNS OF THE NEIGHBOURHOOD 
OF YORK. 

By Robert Miller Christy. 

It is hardly to be expected that I should be able to add much that is 
. new to the already large amount of available information as to the 
Botany of Yorkshire. The subject has been so ably treated by 
Mr. Baines in his ^' Flora of Yorkshire," and by Mr. J. G. Baker in 
his North Yorkshire/' that comparatively little remains to be done ; 
but, having collected for several years in the district immediately 
surrounding the city of York, I hope to be able to give a few inter- 
esting new facts and observations on the ferns of that neighbourhood. 
In the following list I have followed the nomenclature and arrange- 
ment employed in the London Catalogue (7th ed.), and have included 
most of those species which are often spoken of as fern-allies." The 
district which I have considered to be the neighbourhood of York 
may be briefly described as a circular tract having the city as its 
centre and a radius of ten or fifteen miles, although it will be seen 
that this boundary line is a purely arbitrary and non-natural one. It 
includes the whole of Mr. Baker's Drainage District, No. vi. fNidd 
and Wharfe\ part of No. iii. (Derwent), most of No. i. (Ouse and 
Foss), as well as certain portions of the E. and W. Ridings lying 
immediately to the south of the Ainsty of York. Nevertheless the 
majority of the species enumerated may be found within six or seven 
miles, at most, of the city. For remarks on the geological peculiarities 
of the district I may refer the reader to a very pertinent note by my 
friend Mr. J. Edmund Clark, attached to my paper on "The Land 
and Fresh-water Shells of the neighbourhood of York " {Zoologist^ 
1881, p. 175). My own observations have provided me with most of 
the facts given herein, but I have to thank the late Mr. Sylvanus 
Thompson, Mr. James Backhouse, Mr. J. E. Clark, Mr. B. B. Le Tall, 
and other friends, for advice and assistance. The list has also profited 
by the exertions of the botanists belonging to the York Friends' School 
Natural History Society in Bootham, whose results for thirty or forty 
years past are recorded in the MS. pages of the " Bootham Observer." 

Our chief localities for ferns are the city walls and the extensive 
pine-woods to the north of the city, about Stockton and Sandburn, 
but especially those magnificent tracts of virgin moor and bog which 
are to be found in the vicinity, such as Strensall, Towthorp, and 
Riccall Commons, Tillmire, Knavesniire, Clifton Ings, Bishopthorpe 
N.S., Vol. vm. July, 1883. 



178 



The Na.ti ralist. 



Ings, and Askham Bogs — tlie latter being perhaps the best of all. 
Dnring the latter part of the year 1877 I occupied myself with a 
thorough exploration of the fern-flora of the city walls. Commencing 
at Lendal Bridge I went completel}^ round the city, except for that 
part lying between Lord Mayor's Walk and Bootham Bar, which is 
not open to the public. 

Altogether, I am able to enumerate the very fair total of thirty-four 
species, growing within the district. Of these, one — NepJirodium cris- 
tatinn, is new to Yorkshire, if not to the North of England, and three 
— Asplenium TricJwma7ies, A. Adimdum-nigrumy and Scoloj^endrium 
viilgare — are, I believe, new to the neighbourhood of York. 

Fteris aquilina, — Less common than in some parts of England, but 
certainly far from rare. It is cut down by the earliest frosts of winter 
— often by the beginning of September. Among its localities are 
Strensall, Askham, Hobmoor, Acomb, Naburn, Stockton, York, &c. 
At Strensall it has been mea^nrod lift. Gin. high. In September, 
1877, I was searching that part of the city walls situated just over 
the Old Station, when I came upon two diminutive ferns which I was 
totally unable to distinguish, but Mr. Backhouse afterwards informed 
me that they belonged to tinj present species. The shape of the 
fronds was somewhat triangular, the longest did not exceed 1| inches 
in length, and they grew in tufts unlike bracken, when growing in the 
ground. I afterwards found in several other spots on the walls on the 
v/est and south-west sides of the city, abcut 'lalf-a-dozen other plants 
showing "more clearly the species, the fronds being adult, tliuugh none 
exceeded three inches. A bifid variety occurs at Lintonaipon-Ouse 
and elsewhere. 

Lomaria splcant. — South of the city T have not met with this, but on 
the north it often grows fine and abundant, as at Langwith Woods, 
Strensall, and, in smaller quantities, at Stockton, Castle Howard, and 
Dunnington. The fertile fronds stand erect, often reaching the height 
of 2ft., but the barren ones seldom reach that height, are procumbent, 
and often remain green throughout the winter. Both Mv. Backhouse 
and myself have on rare occasions met with fronds of this fern near 
York which appeared to be intermediate between the barren and fertile, 
the latter being most apparent in the lower pinna) while the upper 
ones bore some fructification. Both sorts of frond are not uncommonly 
bifid or trifid. I got eight such fronds oiF one plant at Castle 
Howard, and a quantity from the roadside near Wiggington. A barren 
variety with the fronds three inches broad, the pinna^. also broad and 
curved upwards, with their lower edges somewhat deeply serrated, 



Christy : Ferns of the Neighbourhood of York. 179 



was found at Castle Howard in September, 1877, and I have found it 
inclining towards this variety at Hagg Farm Wood. 

Aspleniitm ruta-inuraria, — A common enough fern to those who 
search for it in our district. In my examination of the city walls I 
found it in abundance. It grows finely on an old wall by the Earl of 
Yarborough's, on some old walls at Copmanthor];)e, on St, Olave's 
Church and the surrounding walls, on old walls near Lendal Bridge, 
finely but not a'bundantly on the old wail forming the back of the 
Castle, also at Kexby, Sutton-on-Derwent, Acomb, and Skipwith, but 
finest of anywhere that I have seen it round York, though scarce, on 
the old boundary wall of St. Mary's Abbey, which now forms the 
backs of the houses on the left hand side of Marygate going down. 
That which grows on the city walls principally does so on the south 
and south-west sides of the city. At the following places it abounds, 
while it occurs more sparingly at many other spots : — On the inner 
side over the Old Station, between the Station and Micklegate Bar, and 
between there and the corner. Whether it be a general rule or not I 
cannot say, but I have observed, almost wherever I have found this 
plant in the York district, that it seems to have a great objection to 
growing on an unprotected nor/Ji wall. The only places where I have 
seen it growing with an unprotected and direct northerly facing are, a 
single plant overlooking Cherry Hill, another close to the Iron Works, 
and several overlooking Lord Mayor's Walk — all on the outside of 
the city walls. It used to be said that it would only grow in the 
mortar of a stone wall, but I have seen it many times on brick. The 
seedling frond is kidney-shaped. There being no natural rocks in sitn 
in the immediate vicinity of York, I should imagine that the spores 
have probably been brought with the stones from other districts. 

Aspleniurn Trlcl/omanes. — Castle Howard (H. Ibbotson), Kexby. I 
found seven or eight suiall plants growing on the city walls between 
Micklegate Bar and Victoria Bar, but they have, I believe, all dis- 
appeared now. Mr. Backhouse suggests that the spores would very 
likely have been introduced with the stone. 

AspleniuM Adiantiim-nlgrmn . — Castle Howard (H. Ibbotson). One 
plant v/as found near York many years ago (H. Thompson). The 
rarity of this species surprises me. 

Atliyrium. -plix-frBmina. — A very variable species. The midrib is often 
pink. The fronds frequently attain a huge size ; at Askham I have 
measured one 3ft. 8in. long, in Overton Wood 4ft., and at Castle 
Howard I found one in a marshy spot under buslios nica,suring even 



180 



The Nat ltka list. 



4ft. Gin. Among its localities are Strensall, Langwith, Stockton, 
Skelton, Overton, Askham, Castle Howard, &c., (fee. The following 
varieties have been identified with more or less certainty : incim, 
Acomb Wood (B. B. L. T.) ; ohtnsum and odontomanes^ Langwith ; 
rhceticum, Strensall Common. 

Scolopendrlum vulgare. — Very rare, near Acomb and Bishopthorpe ; 
very small on an old wall near Lendal Bridge. On the 30th of Sep- 
tember, 1875, we found a number of seedlings growing under the 
mill-arch at Naburn, where the spores had doubtless been floated, as 
the plants were below the level of the highest water. Mr. H. T. 
Mennell (Observer, vol. ii., p. 138) found it at Heslington, and other 
Bootham collectors at Hobmoor in 1852 (Observer). I found a small 
plant which had the edges of its leaves notched, on the city walls by 
the Victoria Bar. These are all in Mr. Baker's Drainage District 
No. 1, from which there were previously no records ; its distribution, 
therefore, is now general in North Yorkshire. 

Cf/ stopfer is fragilis. — Sutton-on-the-Forest (H. Ibbotson). Mr. Baker 
also gives it as occurring in his district. No. vi. 

Jspidium aculeatum. — Though common to all Mr. Baker's drainage 
districts it is rare near York. Its localities are — near Strensall, Lane 
beyond Clifton, by the north road near Skelton, Colton Hagg, Wig- 
hill, Askham Kichard, HealaugL, and on the 30th of March, 1877, I 
discovered a quantity on the edge of Overton Wood. I believe the 
var. lobatam occurs among the rest in the last namorl spot, also at 
Askham Richard (B.B.L.T.), Strensall, Coltou Hagg, and Wigliill. 

Aspidiitm angidart. — Occurs in all Mr. Baker s districts except No. i, 
but very rare near York. Castle Howard (H. Ibbotson.) 

Neplir odium fHix-mas. — A very variable and very abundant species. 
Knavesmire Wood, Langwith, Askham, Strensall, Castle Howard, 
Overton, and most other places. Not unfrequently it grows on walls, 
in which position it takes a very diminutive form, the fronds being 
seldom over four inches long. I have found it so on a railway arch 
near Skelton Wood, on the back of the Castle, anrl in more than one 
spot on the walls. Young fronds seem to be coming up all the year 
round. On June 2nd, 1877, I found in Langwith Woods a frond 
which had a very curious appearance, from having been checked by 
frost. Many of the lower pinnae were very diminutive, and brown, 
being scarcely an inch long, while those above were perfect, having 
grown since the lower ones were cut. The following named varieties 
have been more or less correctly identified : — palccacea, Acomb Wood, 
Askham, eKrc. ) jn'odnda^ Acomb Wood; d'^lomw, lane near Stockton; 



Christy : Ferns of the Neighbourhood of York. 181 



mulilfidnm. (with many bifid pinnae), Langwith, Stockton ; incisa^ 
Acomb Wood ] elongata, % locality. 

Nephrodinm cristatiim.- — Hare. Askhani bog. I, with my friend Mr. 
J* W. West, first discovered it there on September 29th, 1875, and I 
have seen it nearly every year since. I believe this rare fern had 
never before been found in Yorkshire. I decline altogether to state 
even on what part of the bog the plants grow, knowing what has been 
the result when, on previous occasions, the precise localities of rare 
ferns have been described. The plants are but few in number, and I 
believe that there are less than a score on the whole bog, which covers 
many acres. Some of these plants are very fine ones, bearing many 
fronds which push their way up through dead grass and herbage. The 
situation in which they all grow is an exceedingly wet one, covered 
with high bushes. All the plants that I know of grow within half-a- 
mile of one another. On discovering the first root we took about a 
dozen fronds from it, only the largest of which, 2ft. Gin. long, bore 
fructification. Visiting it again on the 26th of August following, I 
found it had increased in size, and that the longest frond was now 
38^in. from tip to bottom. It, with two others, was slightly bifid at 
the apex. I again saw this plant on August 11th, 1877, when it had 
still further increased in size. On the 7th of October following, I 
discovered another smaller root, with one or two seedlings near it. I 
have been unable to discover any other plants than these, but by 
diligent search, Mr. Backhouse succeeded in finding about a dozen 
more roots growing in three patches all near one another. The pinnae 
of this species are set on half across the midrib and face almost 
upwards. 

Nephrodhnii spinulosum, — More abundant than I have ever seen it 
elsewhere. Mr. Baker says frequent in the low country woods, 
especially in the carrs of the central vale." Among its localities are 
Strensall, Stockton, Overton, Skelton, Askhain, Langwith, Butter- 
crambe, &c. I have found it 35in. high in Ask ham Far Wood, where 
it grows in great abundance near this end. It varies considerably, and 
the fronds do not seem nearly so susceptible to frost as those of some 
other species. I believe the following varieties have been identified : — 
the var. uliginosa at Stockton Woods and Askham bogs ; the var. 
chanleriae on Strensall Common (B.B.L.T.) ; and the var. gia7idulosa 
at Stockton. The bifid variety has occurred at Langwith (B.B.L.T ) 
and elsewhere. 

NepTtrodium- dilitatiim. — A large, fine, and common fern growing at 
Acomb Wood, Clifton, Langwith, Naburn, Strensall, Dunnington, 



182 



The Naturalist. 



Kiiavesmire, Overton, Skelton, Sandburn, and Buttercrambe Woods, 
&c. It is generally a wood-loving species, but I have sometimes seen 
it on open commons or banks, as at Wiggington and Haxby (road- 
sides), Tillmire and Strensall. At the first-named place I have found 
a strange plant bearing fronds apparently intermediate between this 
species and the last, having the general appearance of the former but 
the scales of the latter, though less darkly striped down the centre 
than usual. At Castle Howard I have seen quantities of this fern 
nibbled into small pieces by rabbits. The young fronds rise in the 
end of April, and are densely covered with scales of a rich brown 
colour. The bifid variety has occurred not uncommonly at Wiggington, 
Langwith, and Nova Scotia Plantation, and the var. dumetomm at 
Langwith (B.B.L.T.) 

Nephrodmm Thelypterh. — Mr. Baker says, ^' rare in swampy woods 
in the low country. Plentiful in Askham Bogs and Terrington Carr, 
and on Buttercrambe Moor. It formerly grew in Holly Hill Bogs, 
near Castle Howard." Abundant in several parts of Askham Bog^ 
especially in the Far Wood, where I have found it 4ft. 3in. high, while 
2ft. is about the average, and so slender a- fern is it that it could not 
even attain this height unless supported by grass or bushes. In spite, 
however, of the great abundance of this fern, fronds bearing fructific- 
ation are so extremely rare that, until the last year or two, I could 
only hear of a single stunted specimen. On September 27th, 1876, I 
found a plant bearing half-a-dozen very fine fronds, each 3ft. in length, 
and all fructified. This plant was on a rather dry part and removed 
from all others. I understand that about September, 187i', some 
fertile fronds were found on the Bog, and that in Heslington llelds — 
once a locality for this fern — such fronds were not at all rar.\ The 
probable reason for rarity of fertile fronds seems to be that this species 
having a creeping rhizome and plenty of room to spread, selects this 
simpler means of increasing, and does not waste its resources in 
producing spores, as it probably would if its roots were confined. I 
have seen plants growing on a rockery that produced spores plentifully 
(vide Natural History Journal," vol. ii., pp. 89 and 152). A bifid 
variety is not rare. 

Nephroditm OreopU'vU. — Hather common, Strensall, and Wheldrake 
Commons, Langwith, Stockton, Sandburn, and Buttercrambe Woods. 
It is an early fern to die down. On a bank at Strensall, I once got 
a plant bearing one frond with several tips, and another with the mid- 
rib bifid near the root ; one tip and several piinise were also bifid. 



Cheisty : Ferns of the Neighbourhood of York. 



188 



Poly podium vitlgare. — Far rarer than in most districts. It grows at 
Escrick and several places in the Stockton, Strensall, and Wiggington 
direction. At Castle Howard it grows on trees as in the south of 
England. A bifid variety is pretty common. Probably no British 
fern is so given to be bifid, both in the midrib and pinnae, as this. 
The var. auritwn occurs near Turker's Wood (B.B.L.T.), and abun- 
dantly where the railway crosses the Haxby and Stockton Lane. It 
has a small projecting lobe just above each pinnse. 

Poly podium Phegopteris, — Mr. Baker says, in the central vale on 
Battercrambe Moor." It is said tliat this species grew twenty years 
ago in the Long Lane, at Langwith, but has not been seen since, and 
it is therefore very interesting to learn ('^ Natural History Journal," 
vol. vi., p. 181), that last September one plant of beech fern was, for 
the first time, found at Askham Bog by Geo. Bobley and Saml. Lee, 
of the York Industrial School. The fronds it bore were seven inches 
long, and were fully identified by Mr. Clark. 

Polypodium Dryopteris. — Castle Howard (H. Ibbotson). 

Osrmmda regalis. — Mr. Baker says, swampy woods in the low- 
country, rare." Langwith Woods and Asldiam Bogs are our only 
localities. At the former place it used to be common, but now — 
probably because the roots are taken away — it is quite rare there, and 
I have only seen three or four plants ; but, about two years since, my 
brother saw a great number of seedlings springing up in one spot. At 
Askham Bog it still abounds in the Big Wood, and there are a few 
plants in other parts. Seedlings differ considerably from the mature 
fronds, which I have seen growing near 8ft. high at Askham. The 
young fronds come up early in May, and I have noticed that where 
two or three come up together there is often a quantity of a soft 
gummy substance present. The fronds are cut by the earliest frosts 
of winter. The fructification appears about the middle of September, 
but on October Gth I once saw a frond bearing it still green, and on 
the 1st of September, 1877, I found an apparently seeding frond 
bearing green fructification. The whole plant often grows to such a 
size that I believe some would nearly fill a cart. The pinnae are 
sometimes bifurcated. 

OpJiioglossum mdgattm. — Common ; Hobmoor, Clifton lugs, Bishop^ 
thorpe, and Monk Stray, xilso fine and plentiful in meadov/s near 
Stockton Wood. 

Bdrychium lunaria. — Mr. Baker says, area general ; frequent in 
grassy places and on heaths." In our district it is rare, and I have 



184 



The Naturalist. 



never fonncl it. Castle Howard (H. Ibbotson), Linton-upon-Ouse 
(F. T. Le Tall), Knavesmire (Mr. Backhouse in Newman's Ferns). In 
18G8 the Bootham collectors found it at Heslington. 

Lyaopodium clavatum. — Mr. Baker says — " Frequent upon heaths, 
ascending from Stockton Forest and Strensall Common." 

Lycojpodhim inundatum. — Mr. Baker says — In many places among 
the swampy heaths of the low country ; Pilmoor, Stockton Forest, 
Strensall Common, Welburn Moor, Terrington Carr." 

Lycopudlam Selago. — Strensall (Flora of Yorks.) Mr. Baker says — 
Ascending from the vale heaths to the peak of Micklefell." 

iSelagineUa selaginoides, — Mr. Baker says—'* In the Central Valley on 
Stockton Forest and Strensall Common, and in the Howardian Tract 
on Welburn Moor and Terrington Carr." 

Pilularia glob ul'if era. — Ponds near the station at Strensall, pond 
between Bootham and Gate Helmsley (T. A. Smith), Stockton Forest, 
near Copsie's Wood, pond near the rabbit warren on Tillmire. This 
and the previous four species must be scarce on Strensall Common ; I 
have been over it many times, but never seen one of them. 

Isoetes lacmtrls. — Castle Howard lake (Flora of Yorkshire), 
according to H. Ibbotson. 

Eqidsetum arveme. — Very abundant. Early frosts cut it. 

Equisetum. maximum. — Castle Howard, &c , but not near York. 

Eqidsetum sylvaticum. — Castle Howard (Flora of Y^'orks.). Mr. 
Baker says of North Yorkshire, area general." 

Eqnketiim palustre. — Very common. Bishopthorpe, H(>lmoor, 
Askham, Strensall, &c. The fertile spikes occur from June to 
October. The var. yiudiim is common, and the var. polydacJiion is said 
to have been found by Bootham collectors in 1847. 

Equisetum Umo-mm. — Hobmoor, Askham, Bishopthorpe, &c., &c. ; 
W'diV. fluviatile equally common, Hobmoor, 

Equiseiujti hyt^mate. — Mr. Baker gives " in the Central Valley at 
Ilaskelf, Hazel Bush, near Strensall, and between Topcliffe and 
Thorpfield.'* By the Malton-road beyond the Market Weighton 
Kailway (Flora of Yorks.). I believe the collectors from Bootham 
have never found this. 

Chignal St. James, 

Near Chelmsford. 



A New British Moss. — Specimens of a Bryum, lately gathered in the 
river Usk, Breconshire, by the Rev. Augustin Ley, have been sent me for 
examination, and after a good deal of puzzling, prove to belong to B, 
gemmiparum of De Notaris — a species hitherto recorded only for the 
extreme south of Europe, and therefore an unexpected and very inter- 
esting addition to our list of mosses. It appears fco rejoice in the sandy 
deposit lining the sides of mountain streams, and to form considerable 
tufts or patches somewhat like dwarf states of B. Schleicheri, or latifoliurri) 
but from which species it differs in the muticous leaves with narrow 
areolation. Indeed the shape of the leaves is more as in B. alpinum, and 
especially B. Muhlenheckii, but they are more loosely imbricated, more 
spreading when dry, and the tufts of a pale green or greyish-green colour, 
not purplish or glossy. It is not unlikely that this species may be found, 
if looked for, by the sides of some of the streams of North or West 
Yorkshire. — H. Boswell, Oxford, 14th June, 1883. 

Ci7iclidium stygiiim, Swartz. — Apropos of Mr. Cash's note on this 
moss it is reported to me on good authority that it has been gathered above 
High Force, in Teesdale ; if correct, this will be another Yorkshire locality. 
I have not yet seen specimens from there. In the same note, a few other 
mosses are mentioned ; Hyp. rugulosnm, in two or three places in the 
neighbourhood of Malham, but not in plenty. This moss is very abun- 
dant indeed in the old bed of the river above the Cove, in many places ; 
so is Zygodon Nowellii, which Nowell found later on. It also occurs 
plentifully in Gordale, along with Cylindrothecium concinnum. In passing 
I may mention that a few mimics (to a tyro), of the latter species occur 
also along with it ; rock forms of Hyp. pururriy H. Schrcberi, and H, 
cnspidatum. Seligeria pusilla is plentiful on both the Clapham and 
Ingleton ascents of Inglebro' ; it also occurs on rocks close to Malham 
village. Mninm serratttm is also abundant on the Ingleton ascent of 
Inglebro', but is nearly always mixed with M. stellare. — W. West. 

Morchella semilihera at Doncaster. — Referring to the report in the 
Naturalist, of the Y. N. U. meeting at Doncaster on Whit-Monday, I 
note that mention is made of Morchella esculenta in the list of Fungi. My 
specimens were the only ones exhibited in that section, and I have since 
ascertained that they were a decided rarity, viz : — Morchella semilihera^ 
good characteristic specimens. This is confirmed by Mr. W. G. Smith, 
of London, arid I believe that they have not previously been reported in 
the district which the Y. N. U. embraces. — A. Clark. 

Shells, additional to Beverley List. — Since publishing a list of 
the land and fresh-water shells of Beverley and neighbourhood in the 
Journal of Conchology for April, 1882, I have been able to make the 
following additions : — Unto pictorum, Lever canal and river Hull ; Unio 
tumidus, river Hull ; Lim,ax agrestis var. nigra, in gardens at Beverley : 



18G 



The Naturalist. 



Testacella haliotidea, in garden at Beverley. My attention was first called 
to this species by Mr. F. Boyes, of Beverley, and specimens have since 
been kindly procured for me by Mr. Geo. Swailes, from his garden, where 
he informs me it has been taken from time to time during the last four or 
five years. I am not aware that this species has been previously recorded 
for the East Riding. Zonites purus var. Margaritacea, Westwood, Bever- 
ley. — J. Darker Butterell, Beverley. 

The Nightjar. — I am interested in Mr. Butterfield's remarks as to 
the relative sizes of his young nightjars, as I have several times seen 
their nests, if ^' nests " they may be called, and I believe in every case 
one young one was bigger than the other. It would be curious if this is 
always so. I do not find it stated in any account of the nightjar, but it 
is well known to be the case with the barn owl, though that certainly is 
a very different bird. Dr. E. A. Brehm and other ornithologists say 
that the nightjar only breeds once a year, but I have seen eggs and 
young ones so very late, that I have not the slightest doubt it frequently 
breeds twice. I enclose a sketch of a nightjar, which had young, feign- 
ing to be wounded, drawn from the bird as it sat on the bough of a 
Scotch fir. — J. H. GuRNEY, Northrepps, Norwich. — [We regret we are 
unable to reproduce Mr. Gurney's interesting sketch. — Eds. Nat.] 

Notes on Nests and Eggs. — During the past spring the following 
nests and eggs have come under my notice in the neighbourhood of Loft- 
house : — Yellow hammer, nest with three white eggs. Meadow pipit 1. — 
Nest with six eggs. Four were mottled finely with light brown, with 
a slight zone of darker brown at the larger end ; size, 10 lines by 7. 
The other two were blotched with two shades of light brown, the blotches 
aggregated, but not zoned at the larger end ; size, 9 lines by 7. In the 

Rural Notes/' for 1881, I described a nest of the corn-crake which con- 
tained two types of eggs. The facts seem to indicate that two females 
may occasionally lay in one nest. A few years since, a farmer here found 
a nest containing twelve hen's eggs and ten partridge's eggs, on which the 
partridge was sitting. Meadow pipit 2. — Nest with four eggs of a 
uniform dark brown colour, the brown darker, but uniform at the larger 
end ; size, 11 lines by 8 : much like the egg of the nightingale. Green- 
finch. — Nest with four eggs of different sizes. Beginning with the largest, 
the dimensions were : 10 by 6|, 8 by 5^, 6^ by 5, and 6 by 5 lines. The 
smallest egg was the size of that of the goldcrest. All the eggs were of 
the ordinary colour. Chafiinch. — Nest with two eggs ; dimensions, 7 by 5.V 
lines. Nest 2 in. wide, and 1^5 in. deep, composed externally of fine 
grass stems, moss and spiders' webs, and lined with black and white hair. 
Projecting obliquely about an inch above the top of the inside of the nest 
was a firmly fixed white -feather ; this decorative feather was the only 
one visible in the nest, but the rim was further garnished by several small 
bits of white paper, spread and glued neatly amongst the moss. The nest 
and eggs were remarkably small. — Geo. Roberts, Lofthouse. 



Rainfall foii May. 



187 



CuKious Freak of a Duckling. — A curious thing happened yesterday. 
A duck built its nest near the stonework on the island, about ] Oft. above 
the water. I saw eight young ducklings in the nest, called my keeper, 
who took them away with three eggs (young not out), leaving a rotten 
egg in the nest. One of my servants in the forenoon, working near the 
place of the nest, saw the duck take the rotten egg in her beak and carry 
it across the lake to the large willow tree, where it seemed to be burying 
or messing it about. — E. Hailstone, Walton Hall, 28th May, 1883. 

MoNOGEAPH OF BRITISH MoLLUSCA.* — It is proposed to accumulate 
materials for a new and comprehensive Monograph of the Land and 
Fresh- water Mollusca of the British Fauna, and it is desired to enlist the 
assistance of all persons interested in the detailed and exhaustive study 
of the species and varieties of British Mollusca. Communications of all 
kinds, letters, specimens, books, &c., should for the present be forwarded 
to Mr. J. W. Taylor, Office of the Journal of Conchology, Leeds. 



Rainfall fox "^n^. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
leveL 


Rain- 
falL 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


FalL 


HUDDEBSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Kobson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
0-90 


13 


12-54 


n2-ii 


7 


0-22 


Halifax... (F. G. S, Rawson) 


365 


1-09 


17 


17-25 


21-77 


12 


0-26 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


0-91 


13 


10-02 


t8-35 


25 


0-17 


HoRSFOETH ... (James Fox) 


350 


1-20 


13 


11-85 


til -79 


9 


0-30 


Pateley Bridge... (E. War- 
burton, M.E.C.S.. L.S A.) 


436 


1-37 


10 


• 14-98 


§12-07 


7 


0-45 


Baensley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


1-18 


15 


11-66 


10-44 


7 


0-27 


Inqbirchworth (do.) 


853 


1-58 


17 


16.78 


16-01 


25 


0-25 


Wentwoeth Castle (do. ). . . 


520 


1-25 


15 


13-46 


11-83 


7 


0-24 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


1-86 


12 


9-66 


10-61 


10 


0-44 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


1.70 


13 


7.23 


8-71 


8 


0-41 



* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. t Average of 29 years, 1853-62 k 1865-83. 
J Average of 14 years, 1870-83. § For 4 years, 1880-83. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting, June 19th, tlie president, 
Mr. T. Lister, in the chair. Messrs. Batley and Hemingfield gave a list 
of flowering plants taken in recent local excursions. Few insects were 
reported. Hadena glanca has been taken. Mr. Lister gave a list of a few 



188 



The Naturalist. 



birds not included in last report. On April 20tli, the wryneck if< reported 
by Mr. Hailstone, at Walton Hall. This migrant has been seldom noted 
in this district. May 9th, the swift ; 6th, black-cap warbler ; 14th, 
garden warbler, wood warbler, nightingale, spotted flycatcher. Mr. R. 
Parkin wrote, last week in May, that a nightingale was nearer to Barnsley 
than recorded of late years. On May 11th, Mr. Creighton wrote 
reporting the wax-wing in a garden at Hemsworth, and the black redstart 
in front of Hemsworth Hall ; the black-headed gull, sparrow hawks, 
kestrels, and jays. The lesser tern was found dead in a field near Peni- 
stone. The ringed dotterel and curlew have occurred on the pools near 
the moors this spring. The sandpipers are breeding there, and in the 
Dearne valley. — T. Lister. 

Beverley Field Naturalists' and Scientific Society. — The 
ordinary meeting, 18th May, the president, Mr. J. A. Ridgway, in the 
chair. — After some discussion it was decided to hold field meetings every 
Wednesday evening, for the exploration of the immediate neighbourhood 
of the town, in addition to the ordinary meetings of the society, and a 
number of afternoon excursions are also to be organised. A letter was 
read from Thos. Bainton, Esq., of Arram Hall, reporting the arrival of 
the pied flycatcher on May 7th, and a number of interesting botanical 
specimens were shown by Mr. J. J. Marshall, amongst which were 
Hottonia palastris, Geum rivale, Luzida campestris, Valeriana dioicay 
Ka7iimcului) auricomiiSy Buninm flexuosiim, and others. Mr. Butterell 
exhibited a series of Unio pictorum, and Z7. tumidus from the river Hull, 
the edible snail Helix pomatia, and also specimens of the snail-slug Tes- 
tacella haliotidea found in Beverley, and probably the first time it has 
been recorded for Yorkshire. 

Huddersfield Naturalists' Society. — Meeting June 18th, Mr. 0. P. 
Hobkirk, F.L.S., in the chair. — The chairman exhibited a new British 
moss, Bryum- gemmipariim, discovered in Breconshire by Rev. Augustin 
Ley, and hitherto found only in the extreme south of Europe. A large 
collection of local grasses was exhibited by Mr. A. Clarke, who had 
adopted a new system of naming. It consisted in having the London 
Catalogue No., the natural order, ^:he Linnsean class, and the name, 
neatly written upon a card and laid upon the table along with the 
specimen. This system was considered by all present to be a great 
improvement upon the old one of simply calling out the names. Mr. 
Mosley exhibited a series of Meliphora alveariella, sl species very destruc- 
tive to the combs of the honey bee. He also showed samples of injured 
comb, with cocoons of the moth. Mr. Simeon Kaye read a paper on 

The Medical Properties of Plants."— S. L. M. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — Mr. W. H. Pearson in the 
chair. — Mr. W. Stanley exhibited specimens of Cephalozia fiuitans from 
Staley brushes, being a new locality for this hepatic, and IHscelinm nudum 
from the neighbourhood of Mottram. Mr. Pearson exhibited and 



Reports of Societies. 



189 



distributed specimens of the rarely fruiting Saccoqyna viticidosa, which 
he had recently collected at Festiniog, in fruit. He also exhibited 
specimens of A selenium septentriotiale and Glyphomitrium Daviesii, which 
he and Mr. Stabler had collected a few days previously at Llanberis. The 
hon. secretary exhibited a few recently gathered lichens from Sweden, 
and specimens of three beautiful ferns, belonging to the genus Cheilanthus, 
which had been sent from the mountains of the Pacific coast, California, 
viz. : Cheilanthus Calif arnica , C. Fendlm, and C. Clevelandii. — Thomas 
Rogers, Hon. Sec. 

OvENDEN Naturalists' Society. — The monthly meeting, May 26th, 
Mr. J. Spencer, president, in the chair. — The following botanical 
specimens were named by Mr. C. Sheard, viz. : — Equisetum sylvaticum, 
Myrrhis odorata, Vicia Lathyroides, Doronictim Pardalianches, Fedi- 
cnlaris palustris, Folygonnm BistoHa, &c. Mr. Thomas Oockroft, who 
has so often enriched our local geology by the discovery of rare and 
interesting specimens, has again been successful in finding a specimen of 
a new fossil plant which is of great interest, not only to local geologists, 
but also to all those engaged in the study of fossil botany. He exhibited 
a fine specimen of this small fossil plant, which he had obtained from the 
Stannary quarry, belonging to the Halifax Corporation. It has a slender 
tapering stem, which is furnished with four very slender branches 
arranged alternately. The chairman observed that in its form and mode 
of branching, it offered a striking contrast to the great majority of fossil 
plants. He is acquainted with only one fossil plant which could furnish 
such a cast," namely, Astromyelon. Scores of specimens of this pretty 
fossil plant have been found in our Halifax coal-nodules, but this is only 
the second instance (and the finest specimen) recorded of the occurrence 
of Astromyelon in an ordinary fossil condition. The fact of it having been 
found in the mill-stone-grit rock is also interesting, as the only other 
rock, with the exception of our local balls," from which it has been 
recorded is the Ringby flag rock. Recent discoveries in our Halifax 
nodules have shown us the interesting fact that the Astromyelon was an 
aquatic plant, but like most of the other coal plants, it attained a much 
larger size than any of its modern representatives. — J. Ogden, Sec 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Filey, June 11th.— The second 
meeting for 1883 was held at Filey, with the view of investigating the 
section of the Yorkshire coast-line which includes the bold prominences 
of Filey Brigg and Speeton Cliffs, and the intervening concave sweep of 
Filey Bay. There was a large muster of members from all parts of York- 
shire, and the excursion was a decided success. The weather was bright 
and sunny, in accordance with the usual experience of the Union, nothing 
occurring to the personal discomfort of the members. Only two parties 
were arranged, both starting from Speeton railway station. The 
geological party was in charge of the Rev. E. Maule Cole, M.A., while 
the ornithologists had the benefit of the experienced leadership of Mr. 



190 



The Naturalist. 



Jno. Cordeaux, and the genial companionship of the Yicar of Filey (Rev. 

A. ]Sr. Cooper). The latter party visited the famed cliffs of Speeton, 
Buckton, and Bempton, and were rewarded by the view of the breeding- 
haunts of the sea-fowl. These were sitting in thousands on the ledges of 
the cliffs, the guillemots and razorbills being the commonest. The 
operations of the cliff-climbers were also witnessed, and one of the 
ornithologists was bold enough to trust himself down the cliff, bringing 
up with him an egg of his own gathering. Returning from the cliffs, the 
party made their way to Filey along the shore, overtaking the geological 
party on their way home. These two parties monopolized most of the 
excursionists, but there were nevertheless a few who remained about 
Filey to explore the cliffs in the immediate vicinity, and to investigate 
the animal and vegetable life which the conveniently -timed low tide 
revealed on Filey Brigg. Tea, which was somewhat late, having been 
served, and the sections having sifted their findings, the general meeting 
was opened (half-an-hour later than intended) at 5-30 p.m., at the 
Crescent Hotel. Mr. John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U., of Great Cotes, 
president of the Vertebrate Section, was voted to the chair. The minutes 
having been taken as read, the roll was called, when it was found that 
fourteen societies were represented, viz : — Beverley, Bradford Naturalists, 
Driffield, Halifax, Hull, Ilkley, Leeds (3), Malton, Scarborough, Shipley, 
and York (2). The number of members present was about fifty or sixty. 
The following new members were elected : — Mr. J. W. Dunning, M.A., 
F.L.S., president of the Entomological Society of London ; Rev. John 
John Gott, D.D., vicar of Leeds ; Mr. Basil T. Woodd, J. P., Conyngham 
Hall, Knaresbro' ; Sir R. Payne Gallwey, Bart. , Thirkleby Park ; Mr. 
John Hopkinson, F.L.S., Watford, Herts ; Mr. Thomas Hick, B.A., 

B. Sc, Harrogate; Mr. William Aldam, J. P., D.L., Frickley Hall, 
near Doncsster ; Mr. V/. C. Scott, of Leeds ; Mr. Donald McLean, of 
Lofthouse-in-Cleveland ; Mr. R. D. Darbishire, B.A., F.G.S., of Man- 
chester ; Rev. J. C. Atkinson, B.A., of Danby-in-Cieveland ; Mr. R. 
Morton Middleton, jun., F.L.S., of Castle Eden, co. Durham ; Dr, 
Haw(^rth, of Filey ; Mr. J. W. Pallister, of Leeds ; Mr. Leonard Gaunt, 
of Farsley ; and Mr. W. H. Stott, of Doncaster. It was explained that 
t'lese were the first fruits of the issue of the new prospectus, and the 

ibers were invited to assist the executive in adding largely to the 
membership of the Union. Thanks were then voted, on the proposition 
of Mr. Thomas Hick and the Rev. W. C. Hey, to the gentlemen who had 
acted during the day as leaders of parties. The reports of sections were 
then called for, beginning with the Conchological Section. The Rev. 
W. G Hey, M.A. of York, president of the section, reported. For the 
Entomological Section there was no report, the members having deserted 
their own science on account of the attractions of the sea-fowl on the 
cliffs. Mr. Thomas Hick, B.A., B.Sc, president of the Botanical 
Section, reported that no special work on Phanerogamic Botany had . 
been done, but about 32 species were collected or seen by members of 



Reports of Societies. 



191 



the different parties. Among these were a few common coast forms, 
such as Glaux maritima, Plantago Coronopus, and Plant ago 
maritima. Geranium sanguineum was brought in by the Speeton 
party, and was regarded as a somewhat notable plant for the 
locality. Mr. Turner gave his list of Algee as follows : — Halidrys 
siliquosa, var. B minor, Fucus vesiculosus, ditto var. (3 Balticus, 
F. cerainoides, F. serratus, Hymanthalea lorea, Desmarestia aculeata, 
Sporochnus pedunculatus, Laminaria digitata, Chorda filum, Zonaria 
parvula ? Ch ordaria flageliif ormis, Mesogloia virescens, Leathesia tuberi- 
formis, Cladostephus spongiosus, Sphacelaria filicina, S. fusca ? S. plu- 
mosa ? Ectocarpus littoralis, Polysiphonia urceolata, P. fibrata, P. 
fastigiata, P. byssoides, Dasya coccinea, Laurencia pinnatifida, L. obtusa ] 
Chylocladia articulata^ Corallina officinalis, Melobesia lichenoides, Deles- 
seria alata, Plocamium coccineum, Hypnea purpurascens, Chondrus 
crispus, Iridoea edulis, Ptiloba sericea, Ceramium rubrum, C. acantho- 
notum, C. gracillimum, Callithamnion roseum, Cladophora rupestris, 
C. arcta. Conferva serea, Enteromorpha intestinalis, E. compressa, Ulva 
lactuca, U. linza. Appendix : Laminaria saccharina, Chylocladia 
parvula, Jania rubens, Deiesseria sanguinea, Nitophyllum laceratum, 
Rhodymenia palmata, Callithamnion Davdesii, Bryopsis plumosa, Ulva 
latissima. Mr. M. B. Slater, who searched for mosses and hepatics, 
stated that of the former he had found Hypnum cuspidatum (in fruit), 
H. purum, H. moliuscum, H. filicinum, H. commutatum, Trichostomum 
mutabile, Bruch (in fruit), Tortula Hornschucliiana (in fruit, old) ; and 
of the latter he had obtained Jungermannia turbinata, Lophocolea 
bidentata, and Pellia epiphylla. Mr. Slater remarked that the district is 
not rich, and the season too dry, for these plants. Autumn or early 
spring would have yielded a better result in mosses, and as hepatics 
require shade, and like to grow in damp woods, it is not to be expected 
that the bare sea-cliffs would furnish a home for them. Of Fungi, 
reported upon by Mr. H. T. Soppitt, between 30 and 40 specimens were 
collected during the day, amongst which were ^cidium calthse, Puccinia 
calthas, P. galiorum, P. pulverulenta, Phragmidium obtusum, ^cidium 
valerianacearum, epilobii, JE. urtic^, Comatricha Friesiana, Peziza 
Curreiana, and Uromyces Poae. Mr. J. W. Davis, F.S.A., Halifax, presi- 
dent of the Geological Section, on being called upon to report, turned the 
duty over to the secretary of the section, Pev. E. Maule Cole, M.A. , of 
Wetwang, who thereupon stated that the party under his charge made 
for Speeton Gap, where they descended, and walking for some distance 
along the undercliff, eventually reached the shore. The tide being low, 
they then pushed on for some distance under the Buckton cliffs, 
examining the grey chalk with pink-coloured bands in situ. Overhead 
thousands of sea-birds were perched on the crevices and ledges of the 
perpendicular cliffs. On the shore, large rolled masses of white chalk 



^- These were found at Filey by me, in July, 1877.— B. T. 



192 



The Naturalist. 



exhibited on their surface the peculiar suture-like appearance due 
to the presence of minute films of fullers' earth deposited on 
the irregular surface of the chalk when forming. Attention was 
called by the conductor to the needle-shaped structure which accom- 
panied the sutures, and specimens were taken by Mr. G. E*. Vine, 
for analysis. A magnificent potstone of flint, or paramondra, was 
found on the shore, measuring 4ft. in diameter, with a height exposed 
of 2ft. Gin. On returning to the true red chalk, or Hunstanton lime- 
stone, near Speeton Gap, the following fossils were obtained : — Some 
fish teeth, spines of Cidaris, Belemnites minimus, Terebratula semi- 
globosa, T. biplicata, and Inoceramus Coquandianus. A palatal tooth 
of Ptychodus, from the white chalk, was also picked up. The Speeton 
Clays were next examined— they have been carefully worked and 
classified by Prof. Judd. They are a marine formation, equivalent to the 
freshwater Wealden beds of the south, and are divided into upper, 
middle, and lower, each from 150 to 200 feet thick. At the base of the 
upper is a persistent line of cement stones. At the base of the middle, a 
line of nodules, containing shrimps. At the base of the lower is a 
coprolite bed. The characteristic fossils for the three divisions are : — 
Upper, Belemnites semicaniculatus ; middle, B. jaculum, Pecten cinctus, 
and Ancyloceras ; lower. Ammonites Speetonensis, A. Noricus, A. 
Astierianus, Belemnites lateralis, and Exogyra sinuata. The Coprolites 
represent beds of a Portlandian age. The upper clay is the equivalent of 
the Atherfield Clay of the Isle of Wight. The middle clay is represented 
in Lincolnshire by the Tealby beds, and an irony sandstone in Penis- 
thorpe Dale, on the outer edge of the Wolds, near Kirby Underdale, in 
Yorkshire. The Speeton Clay is overlaid by Boulder Clays — but under 
the lowest Boulder Clay, lying on the Speeton Laver Clay, is a preglacial 
shell-bed, of Estuarine formation, Jcontaining Cardium edule and 
Mytilus edulis ; also Scrobicularia piperata and Tellina balthica. The 
bed has been described in the Geol. Mag. (April, 1881) by Mr. G. 
Lamplugh. The contorted beds of Kimmeridge Clay in the clilfs and on 
the shore were next examined. After tea some of the party visited the 
Brigg and examined the Middle (Filey Brigg) calcareous grit and the 
ball-bed " of the lower Calc. grit. In addition to those mentioned 
i-.->ve the following fossils were found during the day : — In the Upper 
Speeton Clay — Crioceras Duvallii, Yermicularia Sowerbii, Area, Nucula 
obtusa, Isocardia angulata, Bostellaria Parkinsoni, and fossil wood ; in 
the Middle Speeton Clay — Myeria ornata, Pleurotomaria, Amm. rotula, 
A. marginatus, A. nucleus, ; in the Lower Speeton Clay — Astarte 
laticosta, Thetis Sowerbii, Thracia Phillipsii, and Rhynchonella ; in the 
Kimmeridge Clay — Amm. biplex, <Slc. At the Sectional meeting Messrs. 
Davis, Cole, Mortimer, Lamplugh, Chadwick, Vine, &c., were present. 
For the Vertebrate Section the chairman reported. A vote of thanks 
to Mr. Cordeaux for presiding, proposed by Mr. W. Barwell Turner, 
F.C.S., of Leeds, closed the proceedings. — W. D. B. 



^ NeC TBMERE — NEC TIMIDE." 



THE 

NATURALIST : 

Journal of the Yorkshire Naturahsts' 
Union, 

AND 

GENEKAL FIELD CLUB RECORD. 

NEW SERIES. 

Edited by C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., and G. T. Porritt, F.L.S. 



VOL. IX., 1883-4. 



HUDDERSFIELD 



B. BROWN, PRINTER AND STATIONER, MARKET PLACE CORNER. 



INDEX TO VOL. IX. 



ORIGINAL ARTICLES. 

PAGE 



Algse of Strensall Common- W. Barwell Turner, F.C.S 77 

Burnt Wood, Staffordshire, Reminiscences of— Joseph Chappell ... 187 

Campylopus brevifolius^ Sch., C. subulatus, ejusd. — H. Boswell ... ... 28 

Darwinism and Beauty — Henry Capper ... 181 

Flamborough, the Sea Birds of— John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U. .. ... 93 

Insects, Where are the ?— S. L. Mosley 85 

In the Tropics— E. Dukinfield Jones, C.E. 125 

Lastrcea cristata near Thorne : its Discoverer and its History — F. Arnold 

Lees 164 

Lepidoptera in the Bingley District in 1883— E. P. P. Butterfield ... 100 

Louis Agassiz — Rev. S. Fletcher Williams 1, 29, 49 

Malham, Principal Plants of — William West 25 

Micro-Aquatics at Strensall — W. Barwell Turner, F.C.S. ... ... 24 

Mosses, Notes on a few European — Gustav Limpricht ... ... 83 

Primary Causes of Variety in Plant Structure — George Massee... ... 109 

Readers, To Our— C. P Hobkirk, F.L.S., and G. T. Porritt, F.L.S. 201 
South Africa, Natural History Notes from- -S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 95, 112, 135 

[141, 161, 190 

South Milford, List of Shells of— George Koberts 87 

Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire, 1881-83— W. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., and 

W. Denison Roebuck, F.L.S 147, 167 

Washburndale : Notes on its Physical Features and Natural History — 

W. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., and W. Denison Roebuck, F.L.S. ... 8 

Wharfedale Entomological Notes — J. W. Carter 81 

Woolhope Club at Hereford : Fungus Foray— H. T. Soppitt 61 

William Wilson's (The late) Tours in Ireland and Scotland— Jas. Cash 41, 63 
William Wilson's (The late) : Notes on his Early Bryological Work- 

Jomes Cash 202 

NOTES, OBSERVATIONS, &c. 

Algse near Mirfield ..William West ... 20 

Badger at Masham — Thomas Carter 116 

Banks' Oarfish— N. F. Dobree ... 151 

Birds near Halifax — F. G. S. Rawson 52, 194 

Birds' Nests from North Yorkshire, Notes on— Thomas Carter 117 



iv. 

PAGE 

Botanical Queries — P. F. Lee 36 

Cambridge, Notes from— Albert H. Waters, B.A. 136, 213 

C hes las obliquari a Sit 'Donc'dster — George Tindall .. ... ... 36 

Coleophora eurrueipe^mella at Doncaster — George Tindall ... ... 104 

Conchological Notes from the neighbourhood of Hatfield Chase ... 115 

Cuckoo's Egg in Ring Ouzel's Nest— E. P. P. Butterfield ... ... 35 

Dicrorampha herbosana Sit GrraiSsmgtoTi. — ,, ... ... 53 

Dunlin at Malham, &c. — ,, ... ... 35 

Entomological Notes—G. T. Porritt, F.L.S 35, 90, 104 

Do. do. from Bingley— E, P. P. Butterfield 89 

Epeira diadema and Salficics sc,en\cn>< in Yorkshire — George W. Oldfield, 

M.A 137 

Epipactis e?isi folia — John Emmett ... ... .. ... 20 

Flowering Plants and Ferns in Lincolnshire — Rev. Wm. Fowler, M.A. 54 

Fox Shark, &c., at Bridlington Quay — N. F. Dobree 68 

Goldfinches near Bingley~E. P. P. Butterfield 89 

Goosanders at Newton Kyme — Rev. J. Chaloner ... ... 151 

Grassington Entomological Notes— E. P. P. Butterfield 35 

Green Sandpiper — John Emmett ... ... ... ... ... ... 20 

Huddersfield Exhibition 71 

Larentia ruficmctata^ &c., in Yorkshire ~T. Basil Woodd and G. T. Porritt 118 

Lasiocampa ilicifolia — G. T. Porritt ... ... ... ... ... 194 

Large Halibut— N. F. Dobree 118 

Lastrma cristata — J. Backhouse ... ... ... ... ... ... 137 

Laverna phragmitella in Yorkshire — Lord Walsingham, M.A., F.L.S. 213 

Lepidoptera in Abbott's Wood, Sussex — G. T. Porritt ... ... ... 36 

Lepidoptera new to Yorkshire — G. T. Porritt 71 

Lepidopterous Captures near York — W. Hewett ... ... ... ... 103 

Lyccena Argiolus in Nidderdale — W. Denison Roebuck, F.L.S. ... 194 

Mackerel and Herrings on Yorkshire Coast — N. F. Dobree ... ... 89 

Mild Winter, Effects of, on Insect Life— A. H. Waters 178 

Natterer's Bat at Pateley Bridge — W. Denison Roebuck .. ... 184 
Natural History Notes from the Barnsley and South Yorkshire District — 

T. Lister 104, 118, 177 

Nephr odium eristatum — R. M. Christy ... ... ... ... ... 54 

Pied Wagtail, Eggs of— N. F. Dobree 194 

Polecat, &c. — George Roberts ... 213 

Redshanks nesting at Masham—T. Carter ... 116 

Itegtdus cristatus at Elland — C. C. Hanson 89 

Sand Lizard, Northern Range of — G. T. Porritt 17o 

Scoparia conspicuftlis at Grassington — E. P. P. Butterfield ... 53 

Slug new to Yorkshire — W. Denison Roebuck ... ... ... ... 68 

Tectura tefttudinaliH in Yorkshire — George H. Parke, F.L.S. ... 152 

Tectura testudii)alis in Yorkshire, Distribution of — Henry Crowther ... 53 

Testacella haliotidea^ var. scutulmn in Yorkshire — W, Denison Roebuck 70 



V. 

PAGE 

Testacella^ Note on — John Emmett ... ... ... ... ... ... 

Trombidium Fhalangii 2it Gordale Scar — G. W. Oldfield, M.A. ... 91 

Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire, Supplement to 138 

Washburndale Shells— W. D. Roebuck 90 

Wharfedale, Natural History Notes from — W. Denison Roebuck ... 70 
^' Where are the Insects ?"— Prof. Alfred Newton, F.R.S., &c. ... 102 

Do. do. — Thomas Carter 103 

Do. do. — S. L. Mosley 119, 137 

White Poppy — John Emmett 105 

Wren's Nest— C. C. Hanson 20 



RAINFALL. 



1883. 


PAGE. 


1884. 


PAGE. 


June 


21 


January, 


139 


July 


34 


February, 


152 


September 


68 


March 


177 


October 


88 


April 


193 


November 


105 


May 


214 


December 


121 







REPOP.TS OF SOCIETIES. 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society 21, 37, 105, 121, 152, 195, 214 

Bradford Naturalists' Society 37, 57, 71, 91, 106, 122, 153, 196, 214 

Dewsbury Naturalists' Society ... ... ... ... ... 107, 122 

Heckmondwike Naturalists' Society 123, 140, 196 

Huddersfield Naturalists' Society 57, 73, 123, 140 

Hull Field Naturalists' Society 57, 215 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society ... 22, 38, 58, 91, 107, 154, 180, 

[197, 216 

Leeds Naturalists' Club and Scientific Association ... ... ... 197 

Malton Field Naturalists' Society 59 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society ... 22, 59, 92, 107, 124, 140, 154, 180, 197 

Ovenden Naturalists' Society 107, 216 

Port Elizabeth Naturalists' Society 22 

York and District Naturalists' Society,; 60, 92, 108, 155, 216 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — York Meeting - 23 



Do. Do. Washburndale Meeting ... 38 

Do. Do. Filey Meeting (Conchological Section) 72 

Do, Do. Malham Meeting ... 73 

Do. Do. Barnsley — Annual Meeting 155 

Do. Do. Roche Abbey Meeting 198 

Do. Do. Sherburn Meeting ... 216 



vi. 

PAGE 

OBITUARY. 

Henry Harpur Crewe, M.A. (Rev.) 56 

Jonathan Thornton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 121 

William Buckler 139 

William Prest 178 

Joseph Wainwright, F.L.S 179 

Edwin Birchall 194 

NOTICES OF BOOKS. 

Barnsley Naturalists* Society — "Transactions" 104 

" British Moss Flora "—Dr. Braithwaite, Part VII 36 

Huddersfield Naturalist Society — "Transactions" 138 

" Natural History of Hastings and St. Leonards " ... 55 

" Naturalists' World " 105 

" Practical Naturalist " ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71 

Wakefield Naturalists' Society — "Transactions"... ... ... ... 71 

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS TO VOL. IX. 

Backhouse, James ... 137 

Bairstow, Samuel D., F.L.S 95, 112, 185, 141, 161, 190 

Boswell, H 28 

Butterfield, E. P. P. 35, 53, 89, 100, 105 

Capper, Henry... ... ... ... ... ... , ... ... 181 

Carter, J. W. ... 81 

Carter, Thomas 116, 117, 120 

Cash, James - 41, 63, 202 

Chaloner, Rev. J. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 151 

Chappell, Joseph • 187 

Christy, Robert Miller 54 

Clarke, William Eagle, F.L.S 8, 147, 167 

Cordraux, John, M.B.O.IJ 93 

Crowther, Henry... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 53 

Dobree, N. F 68, 89, 194 

Emmett, John 20, 90, 105 

Fowler, Rev. William, M.A 54 

Hanson, C. C. ... 20, 89 

Hewett, W ... 103 

Hobkirk, C. P., F.L.S 201 

Jones, E. Dukinfield, C.E 125 

Lee, P. F 36 

Lees, F. Arnold 164 



vii. 

PAGE 

Limpricht, Gustav... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 83 

Lister, Thomas 104, 118, 177 

Massee, George, F.R.M.S ... 109 

Mosley, S. L 85, 119, 137 

Newton, Prof. Alfred, F.R.S., &c 102 

Oldfield, George, M.A. ... 91,137 

Parke, George H., F.L.S 152 

Porritt, G. T., F.L.S., 35, 36, 53, 54, 56, 71, 90, 104, 118, 139, 178, 194, 201, 213 

Rawson, F.G.S 52, 194 

Roberts, George 70, 87, 213 

Roebuck, William Denison, F.L.S 68, 70, 90, 147, 167, 194 

Soppitt, H. T 61 

Tindall, George 36, 104 

Turner, W. Barwell, F.C.S., F.R.M.S 24, 77 

Waters, Albert H., B.A 136, 178, 213 

West, William 20, 25 

Williams, Rev. S. Fletcher 1, 29, 49 

Woodd, Trevor Basil 53 



LOUIS AGASSIZ. 



By Rev. S. Fletcher Williams. 



Read before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society, 
March 19th, 1883. 

Of the names of illustrious men who have promoted the cause of 
science in the present generation, none is higher than that of Agassiz. 
While I am conscious of my inability to do justice to the labours and 
character of this noble student and interpreter of the works of nature, 
I wish to pay at least some feeble tribute to his memory. Louis Johii 
Eudolph Agassiz was largely and richly endowed. His mind was 
fashioned on a colossal scale. His temperament was lively and 
enterprising, his reasoning faculties keen and comprehensive, his 
nature deeply impressible to all excellent influences, and his physical 
constitution of such a frame as to endure the most laborious efforts and 
activities. Scientifically his merits were of the class that commands 
lasting popularity. He was an originator of new ideas ] and that on 
a subject second only to astronomy in grandeur and interest, namely, 
the physical history of our globe, or geology. 

Agassiz was born in the town of Mottier, between the lakes of 
Neufchatel and Morat, in the Swiss Canton of Friburg, on May 28th, 
1807. His ancestors were of French origin, and were among those 
Protestants whom the revocation of the Edict of Nantes compelled to 
leave France. His father was the Protestant pastor of the parish. At 
the age of thirteen he entered the gymnasium of Biel, where he gave 
sufficient evidence of his ability to attract the notice of his teachers. 
After he had been at Biel nearly four years, he was removed to the 
Academy of Lausanne, as a reward for his proficiency in science. But 
his already developed enthusiasm for science was distasteful to his 
father, who destined him for a commercial life, and who was impatient 
at his devotion to frogs, snakes, and fishes. The last, especially, were 
objects of the boy's attention. His vacations he spent in making 
journies on foot through Europe, examining the different species of 
fresh -water fishes. 

He came to London, with letters of introduction to Sir Roderick 
Murchison. 

" You have been studying nature," said the great man, bluntly. 
" What have you learned 1 " 

The lad was timid, not sure at that moment that he had learned 
anything. ^' I think," he said at last, " I know a little about fishes." 
N.S., Vol. ix. Aug,, 1883. 



2 



The Naturalist. 



" Very well. There will be a meeting of the Royal Society to-night. 
I will take you with me there." 

All the great scientific savants of England belonged to this 
society. That evening, towards its close, Sir Roderick rose and said : 

I have a young friend here from Switzerland, who thinks he knows 
something about fishes ; how much, I have a fancy to try. There is, 
under this cloth, a perfect skeleton of a fish which existed long before 
man." He then gave the precise locality in which it had been found, 
with one or two other facts concerning it. The species to which the 
specimen belonged was, of course, extinct. 

Can you sketch for me on the blackboard your idea of this fish ? " 
said Sir Roderick. 

Agassiz took up the chalk, hesitated a moment, and then sketched 
rapidly a skeleton fish. Sir Roderick held up the specimen. The 
portrait was correct in every bone and line. The grave old doctors 
burst into loud applause. 

"Sir," Agassiz said, on telling the story, ^'that was the proudest 
moment of my life— no, the happiest ; for I knew, now, my father 
would consent that 1 should give my life to science." 

Agassiz 's faith in his father was a little premature, as we shall 
see. On the completion of his studies at Lausanne natural history 
had gained so great an ascendency over him that he chose the 
profession of medicine, as offering the best opportunities for prosecut- 
ing his favourite pursuits. He studied medicine at Zurich, Heidel- 
berg, and Munich. At Heidelberg he devoted himself especially to 
the science of Comparative Anatomy, under the direction of the 
celebrated Professor Tiedemann, and his proficiency in this departmeiit 
subsequently stood him in good stead. Here, too, he was noted nofc 
only for his glow and ardour in study, but also for the rare talent of 
managing, with equal dexterity, the rapier and the scalpel. He 
remained at Munich four years, and took the degree of M.D. there in 
1829. 

Before this Agassiz had begun lecturing to his fellow students, and 
had written several important papers on Zoology. His already 
extensive knowledge of natural history soon attracted the notice of 
scientific men. So great was his reputation that in the year 1826^ 
Martins, the eminent Bavarian naturalist, entrusted to him the editing 
of an account of no less than 116 species of fish, which he and his 
travelling companion Spix had collected in Brazil. Agassiz was led 
by h'is study of this work to form a new classification of fishes, in 
accordance with the formation of their scales, to which he sub- 



Williams t Louis Agassiz. 



3 



sequently adhered. Thougli this work gained for him great credit, 
his father still disliked his exclusive devotion to science, and his dis- 
like took the very practical but uncomfortable and impoverishing form 
of refusing to continue Agassiz's allowance. His enthusiasm won 
the heart of a bookseller, who enabled him to convert fishes to other 
purposes than those of study. Another friend also provided him with 
a purse, by the aid of which he visited Paris, where he gained the 
friendship of Cuvier and Humboldt,^ with the former of whom he 
remained until Cuvier's death, in 1832. 

On his return to Switzerland he was appointed Professor of Natural 
History in the University of N'eufchatel — a position which he filled until 
his departure for the United States. In 1833 he published, with the gen- 
erous aid of Humboldt, a great work, Researches on Fossil Fishes^ in five 
volumes, with an atlas of about 400 hundred folio plates, and comprising 
descriptions and figures of nearly a thousand species of fossil fishes.^ 
This work gained for him the respect of the whole scientific world, 
and, at the age of thirty-four, Agassiz was a member of nearly every 



1 Writing from Berlin, on 9th May, 1858, to Mr. George Ticknor, of Boston, 
Humboldt refers to Vols. I. and II. of Agassiz s Natural History of the United 
States, published in 1857 • — The great and beautiful work of Agassiz (the first two 
volumes) reached me only a few days since. It will produce a great effect by the 
breadth of its general views, and by the extreme sagacity of its special embryological 
observations." Humboldt speaks also of Agassiz as "this illustrious life, who is 
no less a man of a constant and beautiful nature." Ticknor's Life, Letters, and 
Journals, Vol. II., p. 338. 

1 may add that Vol. I. of this Natural History of the United States consists (1) 
of an elaborate Essay on Classification, and (2) of the application of the 
principles of Classification to the American turtles. Vol. II. treats of the develop- 
ment of the turtle's egg, from its first appearance to the time of hatching. The 
exceeding minuteness of the history may be inferred from the fact that it occupies 
one hundred and seventy quarto pages of compressed details of the successive 
changes in each part of the young creature's frame, from the moment of the first 
hint towards its formation. It teaches a lesson of thoroughness and patience 
which it would be well for all students to ponder. The development of one egg, 
studied with such care, and described with such accuracy, as to require one hundred 
and seventy quarto pages for the description ! Nor is the work that of simple 
observation and record. It displays an immense amount of patient, instructive 
reasoning. 

2 Agassiz found it necessary to adopt a different system from, that generally in 
use among zoologists, as, in many instances, the organs upon which the latter relied 
for the characters of their groups were absent or unrecognisable in the remains of 
fishes of former ages. Under these circumstances he derived the leading characters 
for his general classification of fishes from the form and structure of the scales, or 
dermal appendages, these organs being generally well preserved in fossil specimens ; 
and this has undoubtedly been of great service in the study of fossil Ichthyology. 
It cannot be doubted, however, that, as is always the case where the structure of 
a single system of organs is adopted as the basis of classification, the arrangement 
of fishes proposed by Agassiz is evidently artificial, and often violates the natural 
affinities of the animals, removing closely allied species to a distance from eacli other, 
and bringing others into close juxtaposition which have nothing in common but the 
general form of their scales. For this reason the system has only been partially 
adopted by succeeding naturalists, although it is admitted on all hands to have been 
of great service in facilitating the study of fossil fishes. Perhaps the most 
important zoological point in the work of Agassiz is the establishment of the 
Ganoidea as a distinct order. 



4 



The Naturalist. 



scientific society of Europe. His next work was his Description of 
EcJunodernu^ followed, in 1839, by his grand treatise on the Fresh- 
water Fish of Europe. 

But the book by which he attained his highest honours, and 
won his best and widest European fame, was his treatise entitled 
Studies of Glacier Sy the result of many years of observation. His 
theory, promulgated in 1837, formed a singular advance upon 
previous geographical discoveries. It is needless to recall to your 
recollection the fact that Werner and Hutton were then the grand 
oracles on this subject. Werner referred to water nearly all the 
changes undergone by the face of the globe. Hutton held that 
fire had been the prime agent. So eminent did their respective names 
become in connection with these two theories, that the one was 
familiarly called by geologists the Wernerian system, and the other 
the Huttonian. Strong parties of advocates and supporters arose on 
both sides. But the majority of scientific people could not coincide 
wholly with either party. The action of both water and fire on the 
surface of the earth was too plain to be disputed, and to regard either 
as the sole agent could not be generally admitted. So that, in the 
course of time, the principal questions came to be, Which of the 
powers had done most '? And in what ways had they acted ?" It was 
perfectly plain that the deeper stratifications had resulted from both 
agencies, aqueous and igneous (or volcanic) ; but which of them had had 
the largest share in arranging the outer and existing crust of the earth, 
in forming its mountains, its vales, and all the varied appearances 
which it presents, was a point really open to discussion. On this 
head men of science still continued to doubt and dispute. By his 
close and searching observations on the icy masses called glaciers, as 
they are to be found in Switzerland and other Alpine countries, 
Professor Agassiz threw a flood of light on this important subject. In 
fact, he began a new era in geology, for it was he who first pointed 
out the signs of the Glacial Period. He proved, beyond question, 
that, in arranging the visible parts of the earth as they stand, water 
had been an agent in a form before scarcely thought of, and to an 
extent before not apprehended. He proved that, in the shape of mighty 
rivers of ice, it had modified the terrestrial surface most materially 
in places where the climate no longer permits of such action. Thus 
the glacier or ice theory came to involve many curious points, 
relating as well to the temperature of the earth as to its actual super- 
ficial structure in early ages. It accounted, also, for matters which 
science had before looked on hopelessly, as, for example, on the 
existence of boulders, or large water-worn stones, in positions far above 



Williams : Louis Agassiz. 



5 



the reach, now-a-days, of the agencies to which they must have been 
at one time and long subjected. 

Although we all know what glaciers are, I will mention, for the sake 
of clearness and completeness, that the name is given to those masses 
of ice which are found, in all elevated latitudes, clothing the mountain 
tops, and clogging up the higher valleys. At the present day such 
phenomena as glaciers are, of course, to be observed only in those 
situations called alpine, or peculiarly hilly ; though a single mount of 
great height, like Mount Etna, presents so far the glaciers with their 
usual peculiarities. However, it is not only where they now exist that 
their action is discoverable. They have left their marks over almost the 
whole globe, or at least over all the northern countries of Europe — 
warm, mild, or chilly ; and so they have led to the certainty that 
immense changes have occurred in respect to the temperature of such 
parts of the earth. By the presence of blocks of stone in quarters to 
which they are by nature strangers, and where they lie alone to 
excite wonder, as also, by the existence of shells where shells never could 
have been found without some such means of transportation, and 
by the presence of the remains of plants foreign to the soil, the action 
of glaciers is proved in climes where they have been long, long 
unknown. Nor must it be imagined that these transportations have gone 
on merely on a small scale, or but from one to another hill side. On the 
contrary, for example, the granite cliff of Criffel, a large hill in Kirk- 
cudbrightshire, has been found strewn on the English shores of the 
Solway, and shifted masses of Norwegian stone have been discovered on 
the eastern coasts of Britain. The alteration of temperature, and other 
circumstances, must thus have been vast, as far as the lands in 
question were concerned ; and the glacial theory assumes a degree of 
importance of no ordinary kind in the eyes of all to whom the history 
of the earth is interesting. 

It was, in the first instance, by observing glacial phenomena on a 
comparatively small scale, or as they exist now, that Agassiz came to 
the conclusions on which he based his great theory. His earliest 
observations were made in his own alpine country, adjoining Neuf- 
chatel. The huge glaciers there discoverable may be poetically called 
" eternal," but they are still subject to change. The texture of their 
component ice is not solid, but spongy, or, at least, penetrated by 
chinks and pores. When the heats of summer occur, they partially 
affect these icy masses, and the water sinks naturally into such 
vacuities. This water as naturally freezes in the winter season, and 
in freezing, expands, causing a general dilatation of the glacier con- 



6 



The Na^turalist. 



cerned. It is loosened, and moves down the mountain side in greater 
or smaller portions, and witli a velocity proportioned to its position and 
to the obstacles in its way. These obstacles, however, where they are 
at all moveable, are caught up by it, and are hurried along to the foot 
of the slope. Wherever that may be, the transported glacier will 
almost certainly be placed in a lower temperature, and will melt, 
depositing all the stones and earth collected in its passage. Even 
before the eyes of Agassiz, huge mounds were thus formed ; and, if we 
count upon the operation of the same agency for a great length of time, 
the results, it may be imagined, must have been immense. The Swiss 
knew these mounded depositions well, and called them moraines. 

Besides the transporting action of the glacier, it has also an effect 
upon the slopes which it passes over. It carries off some parts, and 
levels others to a smooth shape, leaving the rocky masses untouched. 
That many of our Scottish mountains especially, have undergone this 
action, and that the lower grounds display the deposits, was discovered 
by Agassiz, in company with Dr. Buckland, in 1840, while he w^as on 
a visit to Great Britain. It was soon afterwards found that glacial 
scratchings, remains of moraines, and blocks which had been carried by 
ice were not confined to Scotland. Dr. Buckland recognised them 
again and again in Wales and the north of England, where moraines 
and erratic blocks are to be seen in all parts of the country. It is, 
therefore, certain that in our island there must have been at one 
time huge glaciers as large as those now found on the Alps. I 
have referred to " glacial scratchings " for, besides levelling some parts 
and rounding off others, the glacier often leaves strix^ or furrows in 
its course, caused by the heavy bodies it has collected. These are 
sometimes so marked upon very hard rocks as to give a striking idea 
of the force of the originating movement. 

There are various other circumstances connected with glaciers worthy 
of notice, but my object here has been simply to explain the great 
theory which made Agassiz so specially famous. In applying it to a 
practical explanation of much that is to be seen on the face of the 
globe, the transporting power of icebergs by sea must also be fully 
taken into account. Nor can it be denied that there are many proofs 
of the action of standing water, as in the case of the parallel roads of 
Glenroy, and many others where level lines or beaches are observable. 
But, though exposed in a detail here and there to some critical objec- 
tions, the glacial theory of Agassiz was and is a noble contribution to 
advancing science. It does not explain all, but it explains much ; 
and, though observations on the transporting power of ice had been 



Williams : Louis Agassiz. 



7 



made before, it was left for Agassiz to base it on anything like a 
general hypothesis.'^ 

In the year 1846 Agassiz left Europe for the United States. It was 
not his intention to make his home there, but his genial enthusiasm in 
the cause of natural science proved so contagious, that scarce a twelve- 
month was requisite to make America his most congenial home ; and 
when he had finished his course of lectures at the Lowell Institute, and 
had made a scientific tour of observation through the country, he found 
a place provided for him as Professor of Natural History in the 
Scientific School of Cambridge, Mass., founded, after his arrival in the 
States, by the munificence of the Hon. Abbott Lawrence. Obtaining 
an honourable discharge from his duties in Europe, he entered, in 
1848, upon his labours at Cambridge. He also, from 1847 to 1850, 
discharged the duties of Professor of Zoology and Geology in the 
Medical School of Charleston, South Carolina ; and, 1851, those of 
Professor of Comparative Anatomy in the same College. In 1854, in 
conjunction with MM. A. Gould and Max. Perty, Agassiz published the 
work entitled Universal Zoology and General Sketches of Zoology^ ''contain- 
ing an account of the structure, development, classification, &c., of all 
types of animals, living and extinct." He had sent forth, four years 
before, in 1850, his Tour of Lake Superior, It would be very pleasant, 
if I had time, to make many extracts from this most agreeable narra- 
tive : to introduce you to the retired major at St. Joseph's Island, the 
lazy population at the Sault, the drunken chief, the canoes they make, 
furniture, stowage, and comfort^, the crews, the half-breed Indians, 
the Canadian French, in whom was discovered an extraordinary 
resemblance to the Irish, (and no wonder, as they were originally from 
Brittany, the patois of which, the Bas-Breton, is a Celtic dialect, and 
the people were doubtless descendants from Celts, and therefore near 
of kin to the children of the land washed by a melancholy ocean"); 
Henry's cooking, John's genius, the Ojib-men, their simple and savage 
habits, the scenery of the lake, the high rocky islands and promonto- 
ries, the beaches and terraces rising one above another for hundreds of 
feet, the Hudson's Bay Company's Forts, and the furs collected there, 
the northern lights, the fire in the woods, the thousands of islands, the 
comforts of a bed of lichen, the violent winds driving against the 
northern shores, the swimming cows at Fort William, the Kakabeka 
Falls, the dogs and the Kettles, the Indian sweating-house, the incidents 

8 The statement in the text is explanatory only of Agassiz's theory, and not of 
present glacier theories. Agassiz hesitated to accept the Viscous Theory of Professor 
Forbes. For a concise statement of the various theories, see Prof. Tindalls Forms 
of Water, pp. 155-175. 



8 



The Naturalist. 



of a life so monotonous and yet so varied — so unlike common life- 
facts in natural history j above all, the mosquitoes, the flies little and 
great, the vain attempts to encounter the black flies— a consideration 
of which might naturally lead to other questions, how it happened, for 
example, that Beelzebub, the Syrian god of flies, came to be considered 
the representative, the personification, of the very Spirit of Evil him- 
self. For all these, and many other curious matters, I must refer to 
the Narrative, only adding that there is scarcely a subject in the 
sciences which treat of rocks, plants, birds^ fishes, shells, animals of 
all kinds, of land or water, which is not touched upon ; and that the 
productions of the regions of Lake Superior are compared not only 
with those of Europe of the present day, but with those of the more 
important recent geological periods. 

(To he continued.) 



WASHBUENDALE : 
NOTES ON ITS PHYSICAL FEATURES AND NATURAL HISTORY. 

By W. Eagle Clabke, F.L.S., and W. Dbnison Roebuck, 
Hon, Secs. of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. 



[In anticipation of the forthcoming meeting of the Y. N. U., in Angiist, to 
investigate the Washburn Valley, it will be of service to gi\ e a summary of 
what is known of its fauna, with notes on the physical features of the dale, based 
upon our personal observations and such other materials as are at our command. 
The valley is, however, so secluded that it is almost unknown to Yorkshire 
naturalists, and we are not aware of any record of its fauna beyond a list of its 
Lepidoptera made for us by Lord Walsingham]. 

The valley of the little river Washburn — the most important of the 
tributaries of the Wharfe — lies between Wharfedale and Nidderdale, 
and forms part of the ancient Eoyal Forest of Knaresborough. 

In accordance with the physical structure of Yorkshire generally, 
and more especially with that of its mountainous western half, the 
slope of this picturesque little dale is from N.W. to S.E., having its 
highest altitude of 1,600 feet near Simon Seat, and its lowest of 160 
feet at its junction with the Wharfe. In like conformity with the 
geography of the county at large, we find also that the steepest slopes 
and the most precipitous descents present themselves on the left or 
N.E. bank of the river; the gentler inclines and broader slopes on 
the right bank. So marked is this the case in the present instance, 
that we find the area drained by the left bank to be but 14 i square 
miles, as against 22 J drained by the right bank. The total drainage 
area of the river thus amounts to 37 square miles, the waters of 



Clarke and Roebuck : Washburndale. 



9 



whicli are collected into three great reservoirs for the supply of Leeds. 
By far the larger portion of the area drained by Washburn is elevated 
undulating moorland, clothed with coarse grass and beAts, and in- 
cluding great tracts of heatherland towards the higher levels. 
Scooped out of these moorlands are the picturesque and narrow 
valleys through which flow the Washburn and its affluents. The 
cultivated lands are of no great extent, and do not reach further up 
the dale than the little hamlet of West End. 

The infant Washburn rises at an elevation of about 1,300 feet 
above the sea-level, on Craven Moor, to the S.E. of and not very far 
from Stump Cross Cavern. For the first two miles of its course it 
is but a small peat-stream, trickling through monotonous flat grassy 
moorlands, devoid of visible life save when in summer they are 
frequented by such lovers of solitude as the curlew and the golden 
plover, the snipe and the lapwing. After entering the moorlands 
known as " Katty White's Allotment," it flows through low bracken- 
clad hills and receives several small tributaries, those of its right 
bank draining the slopes of Pockstones Moor. Here the life on its 
margins undergoes a change, and in spring one observes the sand- 
piper flitting with butterfly-like flight, uttering its merry note, almost 
worthy the name of a song ; the ring-ouzel, too, perched on some 
conspicuous boulder, pours forth monotonous notes, while the dipper 
finds a congenial home on the rocky portions of the banks. Here also, 
in the season, fluttering among the rushes on the swampy margins, 
may be noticed the pretty little heath-butterfly and the chimney- 
sweeper moth, and not only here, but in similar habitats all the way 
down Washburn side. 

On leaving the monotonous and somewhat dreary moorlands, the 
course of the river becomes extremely picturesque and beautiful as it 
flows through a gritstone boulder covered channel, abounding in deep 
trout-pools, and flanked by steep declivities clothed with coarse grass 
and bracken, diversified and relieved by grey crags and tufts of purple 
heather. On the right bank in one place (at about 900 feet in 
elevation) is a hanging plantation of tall firs, which on the July day 
of our visit proved (for such an isolated locality) quite an oasis of bird 
life. Here, in a very few minutes, were noted the spotted flycatcher, 
the redstart, tree pipit, willow-wren, chaffinch, wren, marsh tit, and 
others. Lower down are here and there stretches of swamp by the 
stream side, and as West End is approached we come upon a series 
of wall-like cliffs of shale. At West End the Washburn receives its 
most important feeder, the Chapelshaw Beck, which flows down a 



10 



The Naturalist. 



most picturesque little valley from the west. The main valley now 
becomes grander in its aspect, and, perhaps a mile or two above Blub- 
berhouses, may be considered as prettier than in any other part, the 
hills which immediately fringe the stream being loftier and well- 
wooded, and in several places overhung with fine bold crags. 

About Blubberhouses itself the valley becomes wider, and the river 
acquires more volume. Here it is utilized for the service of man, and 
the waters of Washburn, gathered from a wide area of moorland 
country, are collected into the three fine picturesque and lake-like 
reservoirs at Fewston, Swinsty, and Lindley Wood, which now afi*ord 
the sole water-supply of the 320,000 inhabitants of Leeds. The two 
upper reservoirs are geographically continuous, being separated only 
by a steep embankment, but between them and the lower, or Lindley 
Wood reservoir, intervenes about three miles of very pretty country, 
diversified by mixed woodlands, of which Dob Park Wood is the 
most extensive. The lowermost reservoir is most picturesquely 
situated at the foot of Lindley Wood, from which it is named, and 
which in summer presents a remarkable aspect from the immense 
abundance of foxgloves it possesses, and which, viewed from 
below, look not unlike regiments of soldiers. The low grounds about 
the river side below Lindley Woods, are in spring enlivened with the 
flowers of the daffodil, once so numerous that Dr. Lees remarks that 
they form quite a feature in the botany of the valley. After leaving 
the Lindley Wood reservoir, the Washburn flows first S.E. and then 
due S., past Farnley Park and the pretty village of Leathley, and 
finally — after a course of 17 miles — reaches the point about a couple 
of miles east of Otley, where it effects its junction with the Wharfe,. 
or as Drayton, more than two centuries ago, in the quaint language 
of his ' Polyolbion ' put it 

Washbrook with her wealth her mistress doth supply." 

Geologically the whole district may be considered as entirely com- 
posed of the sandstones and shales of the millstone grit series of 
rocks, and this uniformity of geological structure produces a note- 
worthy effect upon the vegetable productions, as evidenced by the 
individual preponderance of certain gregarious species. To say 
nothing of the vast stretches of heather and coarse grass which clothe 
the elevated moorlands, Washburndale is remarkable for the great 
profusion of daffodils in the low country about Lindley Wood, and 
the immense abundance of foxgloves in the woods and lanes, to which 
allusion has already been made. Then the river slopes are bright 
green with bracken, while the roadsides are white with flowers of 



Clarke and Roebuck : Washburndale : 11 



Galium saxatile, and the embankments of the reservoirs with those of 
oxeye. But there is plenty of scope for the botanist nevertheless, 
and by the river side there is diversity and abundance of floral wealth. 

So far the district is almost virgin ground for the naturalist, and 
has hardly yet received attention, doubtless in consequence of its 
secluded nature and the difficulty of access to its upper and middle, 
or even to its lower portions. So complete has been the neglect that 
the present article may be regarded as almost entirely based upon the 
observations of not more than five individuals. Mr. Henry Brown, of 
Otley, who was an enthusiastic collector of lepidoptera some twenty 
years ago, extended his researches to Fewston and Dob Park Wood. 
Later still, Lord Walsingham, so well known as a lepidopterist, and 
the owner of extensive estates at Blubberhouses, made notes of the 
lepidoptera which, in a single season, he and his collector, Mr. Eedle, 
had observed in that vicinity. Beyond this, and with the exception 
of our own and a few scattered observations, we are not aware of any 
available information on the subject. 

It is much to be regretted that all our information dates subse- 
quently to the construction of the reservoirs, for there can be no 
doubt that these extensive sheets of water have materially altered the 
climatology of the valley, and it would have been interesting to have 
noted any change in the natural history resulting therefrom. The 
inhabitants bitterly complain that the mean temperature of the valley 
has been very considerably reduced; and the very stability of the 
ground has been affected, the village of Fewston having been ruined 
by land-slips, said to be accelerated if not caused by the water of the 
upper reservoirs. 

FLOKA. 

With regard to the flora we are in possession of no information 
additional to that given at pp. 314 and 315 of " West Yorkshire," 
where Mr. F. Arnold Lees gives a list of the rarer plants, and refers 
to the abundance of the daffodils. 

FAUNA. 

The materials upon which the following lists are founded are the 
observations of ourselves and the gentlemen to whom we have already 
referred. They cannot, however, be regarded as niuch more than 
casual observations ; and no branch of the fauna can be said to have 
been systematically investigated. 

MAMMALIA, 

No attention has been paid to the mammalia of the district, but 
Clarke has noted the following species : — 



12 



The Naturalist. 



Bats. — Small bats have been seen on the whig at Blubberhouses, but 

the species not identified. 
Mole. — Occurs about Blubberhouses. 
Fox. — Not uncommon. 

Stoat and Weasel. — Have been observed about Dob Park Wood. 
Otter. — The reservoir keeper has on several occasions seen this 

animal on the river below Lindley reservoir. 
Water Vole. — Observed in Thackray Beck. 
Field Vole. — Has been found near Lindley. 

Hare and Babbit. — Common, especially the latter, on the rough 
bracken-clad slopes about Swinsty. 

BIRDS. 

The avifauna is a varied one, and its special features or character- 
istics are those of a sub-alpine region, traversed by a trout stream 
and fringed by moorlands. This is testified by the presence of the 
dipper, the grey wagtail, and the sandpiper on the river ; and the 
ring ouzel, the red grouse, the golden plover, and the curlew on 
the moors. The reservoirs form an additional feature, being 
attractive to numbers of wild fowl in the winter, and no doubt some 
species of wading birds also find their margins an attractive half-way 
house when on their annual spring and autumn migrations. 

Clarke has paid some attention to the ornis of the valley, and 
the result is a list of 85 species, which may be tabulated as follows : — 
Eesidents ^'^l.^n 

^ . X r 69 annual breeding species. 

Summer visitants ... 22 J 

Winter visitants ... 5 

Casual visitants ... 11 
The species treated as casual visitors are the pied flycatcher, the 
mealy redpoll, the cormorant, the heron, the wild goose, the Canada 
goose, the mute swan, the goldeneye, the ringed plover, the terns, 
and the gulls. 

The absence of rarities from the list is accounted for by the fact 
that accidental visitors can only be expected to fall under the notice 
of those living in the district, and as yet Washbnrndale has not 
boasted of a resident naturalist. Hence the list is not graced by the 
presence of anything remarkable, nor can this be wondered at since 
it is the production of one whose visits, like those of rare birds and 
the proverbial angels, are few and far between, and chiefly when on 
angling bent. 

Missel Thrush. — Common in the wooded parts. 

Song Thrush. — Common in summer in the woodlands and in the 
cultivated portion of the valley ; less common in winter. 



Clarke and Eoebuck : Washburndale. 



13 



Redwing. — A common winter visitant. 
Fieldfare. — do. do. 

Blackbird. — A c'ommon resident in suitable localities. 
Eing Ouzel. — Summer visitant, abundant on all the moorlands. 
Dipper. — A common resident on the river from its confluence to near 
its source. 

Wheatear. — Common in summer about Fewston, where I have seen 

it perched upon the roofs of the houses. 
Whinchat. — A summer resident, common in the grasslands. 
Redstart. — Common in summer in the woodlands up to 900 feet. 
Redbreast. — An abundant resident. 
Whitethroat. — A summer resident in Lindley Wood. 
Blackcap. — do. do. 

Goldcrest. — A resident in the Lindley Wood and about Blubber- 
houses. 

Chiffchaff. — A summer visitant to the woodlands. 
Willow Warbler. — A common summer visitant to the woodlands up 
to 900 feet. 

Wood Warbler. — A summer visitant to Lindley Wood. 
Sedge Warbler. — A summer resident on the margins of the Fewston 
reservoir. 

Grasshopper Warbler. — A summer visitant but not common, and 

only observed and heard on the margins of Swinsty reservoir. 
Hedge Accentor. — An abundant resident. 

Longtailed Titmouse. — Resident, and not uncommon about Lindley 

and Dob Park. 
Great Titmouse. — Resident and abundant. 
Coal Titmouse. — Resident and not uncommon. 

Marsh Titmouse. — Resident, not uncommon, occurring up to 900 ft. 

Blue Titmouse. — Resident and abundant. 

Creeper. — Resident but not common. Dob Park Wood. 

Wren. — An abundant resident. 

Pied Wagtail. — Resident and common, but less so in winter. 

Grey Wagtail. — Not uncommon on the river above Blubberhouses. 

I have not seen it below that village, but probably it occurs there 

in autumn and winter. 
Yellow Wagtail. — A few frequent the margins of Fewston reservoir 

in summer. 

Meadow Pipit. — A very common resident, especially on the moor- 
lands. 

Tree Pipit. — A common summer visitant to wooded localities up to 
900 feet. 



14 



The Naturalist. 



Spotted Flycatcher. — Common, in summer, up to 900 ft. 

Pied Flycatcher. — A few seen at Dob Park on the 1st of May, 1881. 

These were probably on migratiou. 
Swallow. — An abundant summer visitant. 
Martin. — do. do. 

Sandmartin. — Common in summer about Fewston, and on the river 
above West End. 

Goldfinch. — One seen at Dob Park in May, 1881. Probablv a 

resident species in limited numbers. 
Greenfinch. — A common resident about Blubberhouses ; observed 

also in Lindley wood. 
Sparrow. — An abundant resident in the villages. 
Chaffinch. — A common resident. 
Linnet. — A not uncommon resident. 

Mealy Kedpoll. — Several were shot one winter at Fewston, by Mr. 

Grange, of Harrogate. An irregular winter visitant. 
Lesser Eedpoll. — A particularly common resident about Fewston and 

Blubberhouses. 

Bullfinch. — Not uncommon in the hillside plantations between 

Blubberhouses and West End. 
Yellow Bunting. — A common resident. 

Eeed Bunting. — A few haunt the margins of Fewston reservoir, 

where they breed. 
Skylark. — A common resident. 
Starling. — do. 

Magpie. — Common in and about the woodlands, where it is resident. 
Jackdaw. — A resident at Leathley, but not numerous. 
Hooded Crow. — A few visit Dob Park wood in winter. 
Rook. — A resident. There are fine rookeries at Fewston and Blub- 
berhouses. 
Swift. — An abundant summer visitant. 

Nightjar. — A summer visitant, not common, and hitherto observed 

only about Blubberhouses. 
Kingfisher. — This species appears to be a very uncommon resident, 

and has only been observed above West End. Perhaps this 

scarcity is accounted for by the absence of suitable nesting haunts 

in the shape of steep sandy banks. 
Cuckoo,— A common summer visitant. 
Tawny Owl. — A resident in Dob Park Wood. 
Sparrow Hawk. — Eesident in Lindley Wood. 

Merlin, — In very limited nimibers on Blubberhouses Moor in sum- 
mer ; more widely dispersed in winter. 



Clarke and Roebuck : Washburndale. 



15 



Kestrel. — A not uncommon resident about Fewston, Dob Park 

Wood, and Lindley Wood. 
Cormorant. — One seen by Lord V/alsingham on Fewston reservoir, 

in the early autumn of 1881. 
Heron. — Frequently observed on the reservoirs, which it visits for food. 

These birds are, in all probability, from the heronry at Harewood. 
Wild Goose. — Species uncertain. A party of six or seven observed 

flying over Blubberhouses on the 16th of January, 1881. 
Canada Goose. — Several flying about Lindley on the 18th of March, 
1882. Escapes from some ornamental water in the neighbourhood. 
Mallard. — Resident, breeding in the vicinity of the reservoirs, on 
which it may be seen with its young in the summer. Very 
numerous in winter. 
Teal.— Common in winter on the reservoirs. 
Widgeon. — do. do, 

Goldeneye. — On the 18th of March, 1882, a fine old drake was 
observed on the river where it enters Lindley reservoir. 

Wild Duck. — In addition to the above species, which Clarke has 
identified, several other species of wild duck frequent the reservoirs 
in winter, but have not afforded him an opportunity for identification. 

Ring Dove. — A resident in Lindley Wood. 

Pheasant. — Resident in limited numbers in Lindley and Dob Park 
Woods. 

Partridge. — Not common, in the lower portion of the valley, about 

Lindley and Dob Park. 
Red Grouse. — An abundant resident on the moorlands, especially 

those of Blubberhouses, where Lord Walsingham, on the 28th of 

August, 1872. shot with his own gun 842 grouse — the largest bag 

on record. 

Land Rail. — A summer vieitant, but not common, Blubberhouses. 
Waterhen. — Resident in limited numbers about Dob Park. 
Golden Plover. — In summer a common resident on the moorlands. 
Ringed Plover. — Several observed on the margins of Swinsty 

reservoir in September, 1880, and again in late May, 1881, when 

it is possible they had bred there. 
Lapwing. — Common about Fewston, Blubberhouses, and on the 

moors. In June and July, large flocks composed of young and old 

birds frequent the margins of Fewston reservoir. 
Woodcock. — A resident, breeding in Lindley and Dob Park Woods^ 

but most numerous as an autumn and winter visitor. 
Common Snipe. — A resident ; not uncommon on the moorlands. In 

summer the old and young are frequent on the shores of Fewston 

reservoir. ' 



16 



The Naturalist. 



Common Sandpiper. — Common in spring and summer from the 
confluence to nearly the source of the river, and extremely 
abundant on the three reservoirs. 

Curlew. — Common on the moorlands in spring and summer. 

Tern. — Species uncertain ; probably the common tern. In the late 
summer small parties are frequently to be seen on the reservoir. 

Gull. — Species uncertain. During unsettled weather in spring and 
summer, gulls are not uncommon on the Swinsty and Fewston 
reservoirs. From their size they appear to be either the herring 
or the lesser black-backed gulls. 

REPTILES AND AMPHIBIANS. 
These, like the mammalia, have not received special attention. 
Clarke notes the following : — 

Common Lizard. — On the dry moorlands. 
Common Frog. — Abundant. 
Common Toad. — do. 

FISHES, 

Minnow. — Abundant in the reservoirs and in Thackray beck. 
Golden Tench (a varieiy of the Common Tench). — Lord Walsingham 

has introduced this fish into Fewston reservoir. 
Loach. — Occurs in Swinsty reservoir. 

Trout. — Abundant, especially in the river above Blubberhouses and 

in the reservoirs. In the latter it attains to a large size. 
Loch Leven Trout. — This interesting species has been introduced 

into the river by Lord Walsingham. 
Grayling. — Has been observed in some numbers about Dob Park, 

going up stream to spawn. It is questionable if this species is not 

now resident in Lindley reservoir. 
Sharpnosed Eel. — Occurs in the reservoirs. 

MOLLTTSGA. 

The very scanty list of mollusca here given is based upon the few 
specimens which casual visits to the valley have yielded to 
Eoebuck, and as a matter of fact it represents the product of but a 
few hours' actual collecting. Further research will add numerous 
species, although the district is not one from which a very rich result 
may be expected, owing to the uniformity of the geological structure, 
and more especially its deficiency of calcareous rock. The presence 
of Zonites excavatus, and the absence of limestone-frequenting species, 
are sufficiently demonstrative of this. 



Clarke and Roebuck : Washbuendale. 



17 



Limncea peregra. — Common in Fewston reservoir. 

Ancylus fluviatilis, — Common in streams at Blubberhouses, in Dob 

Park Wood, and running into Lindley Wood reservoir. It would 

be of interest to ascertain its altitudinal range in the district. 
Avion ater, — Abundant round the margins of the reservoirs, and 

occurs as high up the dale as Hoodstorth, 
A. hortensis. — Common (and variable) round Fewston reservoir. 
Limax agrestis. — Abundant round the margins of the reservoirs, also 

as far as the upper limit of cultivation at West End. 
L. arhorvm. — One at Gill Bottom, near Swinsty reservoir, and one 

(immature) under a stone near West End. 
Zonites excavatus. — In the upper portion of Dob Park Wgod. 
Z. cellarius, — Common in the churchyard at Fewston, and occurs as 

high up the dale as Hoodstorth. 
Z. nitidulus^ Helix rufescens^ and H, rottmdata^ common in Fewston 

churchyard. 
Helix hortensis. — Near Lindley Wood. 

H, pulchella. — Has been found under stones at Old Camp, near 
Fewston. 

COLJEOFTERA, 

Of the beetles, only four well-known and conspicuous species have 
been identified : 

Cicindela campestrisy the tiger beetle. — Common near West End 
(W. E. C.) 

CycJirus rostratus. — Margin of Swinsty reservoir. 
Melolontha vulgaris^ the cockchafer. — Washburn valley (D. Rhodes). 
Lampyris noctiluca^ the glow-worm. — Common on the margins of 
Lindley Wood reservoir (W. E. C.) 

LEPILOPTEltA. 

The list of lepidoptera is mainly from the observations made by 
Lord Walsingham (and by his lordship's collector, Thomas Eadle) 
in the vicinity of his shooting-box at Blubberhouses. Lord Wal- 
singham's visits to his estates are usually short, and devoted to 
grouse-shooting, but in 1882 he made, at our request, notes of the 
species observed. To these we add others from the observations 
made near Fewston about twenty-two years ago, by Mr. Hy. Brown, 
of Otley, and from casual notes made by ourselves and others. The 
authorities are given for all except Lord Walsingham's observations. 
Pieris rapce. — Lindley Wood (W. E. C.) and Blubberhouses. . 
P. napi, — Leathley (W. D. R.) and Blubberhouses. 



18 



The Naturalist. 



Anthocharis cardamines— Common about Fewston (H. Brown, W.E.C.) 

and Blubberhouses. 
Argymm selene. — In 1873 Mr. F. Arnold Lees noted it as "plentiful 

in glades and bushy places near Lindley Wood." It does not 

appear to have been seen since, and it would be interesting to 

ascertain if it was exterminated by the construction of the Lindley 

Wood reservoir. 
Vanessa urtica^ V. lo, V, atalanta. — Fewston (H. Brown). 
Satyrus janira. — Very plentiful near Dob Park (H. Brown, W. E. C.) 

and Leathley (W. D. R.) 
€hortobius pampliilus. — Very abundant in all damp hollows from 

Washburn source to Lindley Wood. 
Polyommatus PJiloeas^ Lycceua alexis. — Abundant at Fewston (H, 

Brown). 

Smerinthus popwlL — Fewston (J. W. Speck). 

Hepialus velleda. — Abundant on the moorlands near the source of the 

Washburn (W. E. C), and at Blubberhouses. 
H, humulL — In 1882 Eadle took at Blubberhouses varieties which 

in the decidedly pinkish tinge of the hind wings approached the 

Shetland ones. 

Bomhyx rubi. — Larvae abundant on Swinsty Moor (H. Brown). 
B, caZZz^^^e.- -Blubberhouses. 

Lasiocampa ilicifolia. — When collecting at Blubberhouses in 1882, 
Eadle thought he saw this species, and Lord Walsingham writes 
that he has always thought the locality a likely one for it. 

Humia cratagata, — Common at Fewston (H. Brown) and Blubber- 
houses. 

Selenia illumria, PJiigalia pilosaria, AmpMdasis betularia, Tephvsia 

biundularia, Blubberhouses. 
Eupisteria heparata. — Blubberhouses . 
Acidalia fumata, — Fairly common at Blubberhouses. 
Cabera pusaria, C. exanthemaria. — Blubberhouses. 
Macaria litnrata, Mdonia utomariay F. piniaria. — Blubberhouses. 
Sybernia progemmaria, — Dob Park Wood (W. E. C.) 
Larentia ccesiata. — Blubberhouses, common. 
Emmelesia albiilata. — Blubberhouses. 
Eupithecia lariciata, — Very abundant at Blubberhouses. 
E. nanatay E, minutata, — Blubberhouses Moorg. 

MelantJiia albicillata, — Mr. John Grassham has taken this species at 

Lindley Wood. 
Melanippe tristata. — Blubberhouses. 



Clarke and Roebuck : Washburn dale. 19 



31. monianata.— Common at Blnbberhouses, where, as Lord Walsing- 
ham informs us, in 1882 Eadle took a variety very like the extreme 
northern form. 

Coremia propu{/nata, C.ferrugata var. — Blnbberhouses. 
Tanagra choerophyllata, — This pretty species is common on grassy ings 

along the whole course of the Washburn (W. E. C. and W. D. R.) 

Near Fewston (J. W. Speck,) Blnbberhouses, common. 
Dicranura vinula, — Fewston (J. W. Speck). 
Notodonta camelma^ N. ziczac. — Blnbberhouses. 

Cymatopliora Jiavicornis. — Found in Blnbberhouses and near Dob 
Park Bridge (W. D. R.) 

Nonagria fulva^ HydrcBcia nictitaiis, XylopJiasia rurea^ Miana arcuosa^ 
Ca7'adrina alsines, Agrotis porphyrea, Blnbberhouses. 

Triphcem pronuba. — Lower Platts (W. E. C.) 

NocLua brunnea. — Margin of Fewston reservoir (W. .D. R.) 

Hadena dentina^ Anarta myrtilli — Blnbberhouses. 

Flmia gamma. — Abundant throughout the valley, 

Botys fuscalis^ Grambus dumetellus^ C. culmellus^ 0. hortuellus, Phycis 
carbona7nella, Tortrix unifasciam^ T. viburnana, T. icterana^ Peronea 
ScJialleriana. — Blnbberhouses. 

Peroma Caledoniana. — Swarms on the Blnbberhouses moors. 

Penthina eynosbana, Pardia trlpunctana^ Sericoris lacunana^ SciapMla 
subjectana. — Blnbberhouses. 

Sciophila octomaculana. — Larvae taken in 1882 at Blnbberhouses, in 
flowers of a PLieracium or nearly-allied plant. 

Bactra lanceolana, Phoxopteryx myrtillana. — Blnbberhouses. 

Pwdisca occiiltana. — Many larvae on larch at Blnbberhouses in 1882. 

P, Solandriana Coccyx hyrcinima, Bicroramp'h.a plimbagana^ CocJiylis 
Smeathmanniana, Endrosis fenestrella, Coleophora ccBspititiella^ Litho- 
coUetis alnifoliellaj Nepticula myrtillella, (Ecophora stipella, Argyresthia 
spinieUa, GilecJiia teriella, G. thrasonella, var. cladiella. — Blubber- 
houses. 

Hyponomenta evonymella. — Plentiful in Dob Park Wood (H. Brown). 
Blnbberhouses. 

HYMENOFTERA. 
Several species of bees and ants have been observed, but the 
specimens and notes having been mislaid, we are unable to mention 
any other than 

Bombus lucoruMy which is common round the reservoirs. 

DIFTERA. 

Hcemaiopota pluvialis' — This — the Cleg " — is abundant throughout 
the dale. 



20 



The Naturalist. 



Of the other groups of animals no observations appear to have 
been made, and there is consequently a wide field for investigation. 
As the object of the present paper is to stimulate research, more 
especially upon the day of the excursion of the Y.N.U., the writers 
will be pleased to have further notes and lists, whether made then or 
at any other time, and these they propose to incorporate with the 
supplementary lists which they hope to insert in a future number of 
the Naturalist. 

Leeds, July 18th, 1883. 



ALGiE NEAR MiRFiELD. — Mr. C. P. Hobkirk recently sent me a most 
interesting alga from near Mirfield. It proves to be GEdogonium Lands- 
boroughii, Hass. It was in fine fruit, and is an addition to our list of 
West Hiding algse, as also are the six first mentioned of the following, 
which I found mixed with the (Edogoniiim: — Spirogym insignis, Hass., 
Hydriamim heteromorphum, Reinsch., Cosmarium ornatum, Halfs., Clos- 
terium Leihleinii, Ktg., C. acerosum, Schrenk, Nitschia lineavia, Sm. ^ 
Spirogyra longata, Yauch., var. a. communis (Hass.) in conjugation, 
Oscillaria BVoelichii, Ktg. , forma tenuior, Rabenh. , Cledophora glomerata, 
L. (in attenuated form), Plenrotcenium haculum, Breb., Cosmarium 
margaritiferum, Turp., Synedra splendens, Ktg. (some being 119mm. in 
length), Diatoma dongaUim, Cymatopleura elliptica, Breb., Pleurosigma 
acuminatum, Grun., Melosira varians, Ag., and other small diatoms. 
After keeping the gathering a few days in an open dish, there was a rich 
supply of rotifers, Dinocharis tetractis, ' Ehrh. , being very conspicuous 
with its long forked foot with two horns at the base. — Wm. West. 

Wren's Nest. — On the 11th inst. I was present when a person found 
the nest of the common wren, which had the means of ingress narrowed 
to a very small hole. During examination out flew a corder bee {Bomhus 
muscorum), the nest contained two wren's eggs smeared with honey, and 
a comb about the size of a large date, containing larvss of the bee. . Land 
rails are numerous here this year. — C. C. Hanson. 

Epipactis ensifolia. — I have often looked for this plant at the original 
station at Jackdaw Crag, ^ near Stutton, where it was first found by the 
late 0 . A. Moore, but always without success. Once I went, along with 
Mr. Moore, and we diligently looked over the place, but the plant was 
nowhere to be found. In June of this year, Capt. Thompson, of Tad- 
caster, told me his son had found it about half-a-mile from the first- 
named habitat, and I went and saw nearly a score plants in full flower ; 
in nearly every case they were under beech trees. — John Emmet, Boston 
Spa, July, 1883. 

Green Sandpiper. — I received a note from Rev. J. Chaloner, of 
Newton Kyme, last month, in which he says : — I saw a rare bird here 



Rainfall for June. 



21 



on the 28th June, viz., a green sandpiper, which is the fourth I have ever 
seen, one of which I killed. Graham, the bird-stuffer, a short time ago 
told me they were not only very scarce, but that a nest had never been 
found." — John Emmet, Boston Spa, July, 1883. 



Rainfall fox |nm. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. 


No 
of' 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 

of 

Ueaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


m. 

3-74 


18 


16-28 


n4-57 


29 


0-92 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Eawson) 


365 


3-99 


18 


21-24 


27-02 


26 


0-94 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


3-42 


19 


13-44 


tlO-62 


29 


1-00 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


3-88 


19 


15-73 


J15-03 


29 


1-0:^ 


Pateley Bridge... (E. War- 
burton, M.R.C.S.. L.S.A.) 


436 


3-26 


13 


18-24 


§15-82 


25 


1-30 


Barnslet ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


3-32 


15 


14-98 


14-37 


25 


0-90 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


5-28 


18 


22.06 


20-79 


29 


1-35 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


3-80 


12 


17-26 


15-04 


29 


0-98 


ClooLE ... (J. • Harrison) ... 


25 


1-87 


12 


11-51 


14-57 


25 


0-70 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


3.11 


9 


9.14 


11-82 


25 


0-76 



* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. f Average of 29 years, 1853-62 & 1865-83. 
t Average of 14 years, 1870-83. § For 4 years, 1880. 

Rainfall at Scarborough is 2-67 inches, of which 2.03 fell from the 25th to 30th 
inclusive. 



!££|aorls of Boddm. 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meetings, July 3rd and 18th. — The 
botanists gave account of various flowering plants noted in a local 
excursion. July l7th, on Thorne Waste, all three species of Brosera, 
Andromeda polifolia abundant, Feucedanum officinalis, Thalictrum flavum, 
Tijpha latifolia ; July 19th, Hydrocotyle vulgaris, Carex pidicaris, 
Ranunculus Lenormandi. Mr. Lister observed on Langsett Moors 
and Brookhouse, ring-ouzels, lapwings (both numerous), twite, stone- 
chats, none of which were noted in our lowland tracts ; also swallow and 
martins in Outgate, near the Derbyshire boundary. The black tern, as 
well as water birds recorded last month, noted at Ingbirchworth. The 
nightingale an earlier date than the one given last month (May 1), it 
ceased singing early in June, and safely reared its brood. One was 
heard singing as late as June 23rd, at Campsall. Kingfishsrs have bred 
generally in safety. Swifts seen once or twice at Gawber,* &c. — T. L. 



22 



The Naturalist. 



Lancashire aist> Cheshire Entomological Society. — Monthlj^ 
meeting, June 25th. Mr. S. L. Mosley, of Huddersfield, read a paper 
entitled *^ Natural History Education," in which he alluded to the desi- 
rability of a more extended knowledge of Natural History subjects, 
especially of botany and entomology, believing as he did that a large amount 
of the injury done to food-crops, &c., through insect agency, might be 
prevented or diminished by a more extended knowledge of the life 
histories of the insects themselves. He suggested that lessons on Natural 
History might be taught in board schools with great advantage to the 
scholars ; and he alluded to the excursions of the Huddersfield Board 
School children, conducted by himself, and to the great interest taken in 
these matters by most of the children. A number of interesting entomo- 
logical exhibits were shown during the conversazione which followed. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — Monthly meeting, Mr. W. H. 
Pearson, president, in the chair. — The hon. secretary brought before the 
notice of the society a new British moss which had been recently sent to 
him by Mr. Bos well, of Oxford, who had determined its identity with 
the Bryum gemmiparum oi De Notaris (see Naturalist, vol. viii., p. 185). 
The secretary also exhibited specimens of Mylia Taylori with colesules, 
collected near Bala last month. Mr. George Davis, of Brighton, sent 
specimens of Leptodon Smithii, in fruit, for distribution. Mr. Cash also 
distributed specimens of Myurella julacea, which he had recently 
collected at Ingleborough. Mr. James Percival sent a living specimen of 
Cindidium styghim in fruit from Malham, and in his letter recorded the 
finding of Cypripedium Calceolus. — Thos. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — At the usual monthly meeting. 
Dr. Carrington, F.R.S.E., in the chair, Mr. James Cash exhibited a 
specimen of the rare British moss, Gymnostomuni calcaremn in fruit, 
which had been gathered during the present month in Monsal Dale,- 
Derbyshire, by Mr. G. A. Holt. Dr. Carrington placed upon the table 
a large number of letters from eminent cryptogamic botanists in the 
earlier part of the present century, who had been in correspondence with 
the celebrated Lancashire botanist, Edward Hobson. Many of the letters 
had reference to the collection of mosses made by Hobson at that time, 
copies of which are now in our Free Reference Library and Cheetham 
College. Dr. Carrington interested the members most pleasantly for the 
Test of the evening by reading letters from George Caley, W. Wilson, 
Dr. Greville, Sir W. Hooker, Lyell, Bree, Schleicher, Dr. Taylor, James 
Dalton, and Sir J. W. Jardine. The letters were placed in the hands of 
Mr. J. Cash for compilation and future reference. — T. Pogers, Hon. Sec. 

Port Elizabeth Naturalists' Society. — The ordinary meeting of this. 
Society on June 7th — Mr. C. P. Pead presiding— was entirely devoted to 
the exhibition of specimens. Mr. Farquhar brought with him a few 
coleoptera, and a very remarkable stunted crab, from the mouth of 
Shark's Piver. The chairman shewed a fine marine shell (Scalaria), and 
Mr. Leslie samples of soil from De Beer's Mine. The secretary exhibited 



Eeports of Societies. 



2^ 



^ good assortment of triton shells of various sizes, and five species of star 
fishes. In speaking of the progress of the society, Mr. Bairstow 
announced that if, at the next annual meeting, it could be proved satis-^ 
factorily the naturalists had made sufficient headway to warrant such a- 
course, the constitution of the society would be entirely changed and 
placed upon a thoroughly sound basis. The society did not require 
useless, inanimate patronage. It lacked practical aid and hard-workers- 
— students, observers, and collectors. The latter compose an inseparable 
trio when results are considered. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — York, July 14th. — The third 
meeting for 1883 was held at York, for the purpose of investigating^ 
Strensall Common and Sandburn Woods. Although the day was 
remarkably fine, the attendance was very small — another proof that 
secluded localities and those difficult of access are popular with the 
members. One party, under the guidance of the Rev. W. C. Hey, 
M.A., alighted at Warthill station, and soon afterwards divided into two 
sections — one bent on captures in entomology, and the other botanically 
inclined. Both these, after investigating Sandburn Woods, devoted 
themselves to the Natural History of the Common. In addition to these, 
a party composed of conchologists and microscopists approached the 
Common from Strensall. All assembled at Strensall station and took 
the 5-36 train for York, where • a meat tea was a,waiting them at the 
Exhibition Refreshment Booms. The general meeting was held in the 
large room over the Savings Bank. The Bev. W. C. Hey, M.A.^ 
occupied the chair. The minutes of the Filey meeting were taken as 
read, and on the roll being called, nine societies were found to be repre- 
sented, viz., Beverley, Dewsbury, Huddersfield, Leeds (2), Scarborough, 
Selby, and York (2). The following new members were proposed and 
duly elected :— Mr. Walter Morrison, High Sheriff" of Yorkshire, Tarn 
House, Malham ; the Bev. J. S. Tute, of Markington Yicarage, Bipley ; 
and Mr. Thomas Gough, B.A., B.Sc, F.G.S., of York. A vote of thanks 
was accorded to the Bev. W. C. Hey for the kindly interest he had taken 
in the arrangements for the meeting, and for his guidance during the day. 
The reports of the sections were then taken. For the Entomological 
Section Mr. G. T. Porritt said the lepidopterists were well satisfied with 
their work. At Sandburn Epione vespertaria was well out, and in 
beautiful condition ; and other species taken or seen on the same ground 
included Argyimis Selene, common but very worn ; Satyrus Hyphanthus 
plentiful, and included the variety without rings ; Chortobius Pamphilus 
and Lycsena Alexis, both abundant ; Hesperia Sylvanus, plentiful ; 
^ygsena filipendula and Z. lonicerse abundant, especially the latter ; 
Lithosia rusomella, common ; Tortrix viburnara, abundant ; Sciaphila 
nubilana, common ; Trochea piniperda, larva3 common ; Acronycta 
menyanthidis, larvae ; and many others. On Strensall Common he had 
taken a beautiful and extraordinary black variety of Eubolia palumbaria 
in perfect condition ; also Euthemonia russula, very fine ; Crambus 



24 



The Naturalist. 



pascuellus, EupiTecilia angustana, &c., &c. Mr. P. F. Lee, secretary for 
phanerogamic botany, reported, upon the day's proceedings, that the 
total number of phanerogams, ferns, &c., of London Catalogue observed 
on the Common, as well as at Warthill and near the village of Strensall, 
was 258. Of these, note should be made of the following, as they include 
some good things rarely met with at the Union's excursions : — Drosera 
intermedia, Polygala vulgaris, sub. sp. depressa, Stellaria glauca, Hyper- 
icum elodes, Radiola millegrana. Spiraea Filipendula, Carduus pratensis, 
Pyrola minor, Scutellaria minor. Daphne Laureola, Habenaria bifolia, 
Carex dioica, C. pilulifera, C. distans, sub-sp. falva, Aira caryophyllea, 
irestuca myurus, sub.sp. sciuroides, Nephrodium Oreopteris, Botrychium 
Lunaria, Lycopodium inundatum. The Cryptogams (for which Mr. G. 
Massee reported) appertaining to heathy swamps were abundant ; good 
fruiting specimens of the following were obtained : — Pilularia globulifera, 
Sphagnum rosellum, S. acutifolium, S. squarrosum, Meesia uliginosa, 
Lastrsea Oreopteris, Lycopodium inundatum barren. Amongst algse and 
fungi the most noteworthy were Yolvox globator, Chsetophora tubercu- 
losa, Mougeotia genuflexa, Meridion circulare ; Omphalia campanella, 
0. umbelliferus, Thelephora terrestris, and Tubulina cylindrica. For 
the Geological Section no report was presented. In Vertebrate Zoology 
Mr. Clarke, secretary, reported that most of the specimens announced in 
the circular had been observed, and in addition to these the curlew. The 
sandmartins, numerous on the common, were nestling in the turf-clad 
marker's butts — the only habitat offered in the neighbourhood. The 
water vole among the mammalia, the lizard (Zootoca vivipera) among the 
reptiles, and the trout and stickleback among the fishes, were also 
observed. 



Micro-aquatics at Stkensall. — On our recent Y. N.U. visit to Strensall 
Common, I was the only collector of micro-aquatic plants, and I found a 
rare store of ^' good things," — some new to Yorkshire, and I almost think 
new to England, as certain desmids which I found have only been 
reported from Wales (A. W. Wills, of Birmingham, in his famous Capel- 
Curig gathering), and Ireland (W. Archer, F.R..S., of Dublin). When 
verified, I will send a full list, but at present will only mention the 
following as a sample : — Microspora fugacissima, Aptogonum desmidium, 
Glseocystis rupestris, G. ampla, Cosmarium pyramidatum, C. margariti- 
ferum, C. cucurbita, Euastrum binale. E. elegans, E. didelta, Xanthidium 
fasciciilatum, X. octocorne, Zygnema stagnale, Z. stellinum, Staurastrum 
dilatatum, S. furcigerum, S. anatinum, S. aristiferum, S. inflexum, S. 
margaritaceum, Arthrodesmus convergens, A. incus, Polyedrium tetra- 
hedricum, Pediastrum Ehrenbergii, P. Boryanum, Sphoerozosma verte- 
bratum, Anabaina circinalis, Yolvox globator (T. Hick), ditto, (W. B. T.) 
It is to be noted that Diatomacese were but few in number, and that 
many common confervas and desmids are conspicuous by their absence 
from this gathering. — W. B. Turner, Leeds, 24th July. 



THE PRINCIPAL PLANTS OF MALHAM. 



By Wm. West. 



As there is to be a ramble of the Yorkshire Naturalists' at Malham^ 
on the first of September, I thought that a list of the rarer plants 
that can be collected there would be opportune. I can vouch for thd 
occurrence of every plant I mention, having collected them all my- 
self. I have collected few of the lichens there are there, and still 
fewer fungi, though the district will yield many interesting plants 
belonging to these groups, if they be properly looked ior, especially 
lichens, a fair collection of which I have among my unexamined 
specimens :— 



Ranunculus penicillatus 
E. auricomus, with large perfect petals 
Trollius europaeus 
— -Thalictrum montanum 
Actsea spicata 
Draba incana 
D. muralis 
Cochlearia alpina 
Thlaspi occitanum 
Arabis hirsuta 
A. thaliana 

Heliantbemum vulgare 

Viola hirta 

V. lutea 

Y. amoena 

Alsine verna 

Sagina nodosa 

Hypericum montanuni 

H. hirsutum 

H. perforatum 
-«r Geranium pratense 
^•G. sylvaticum 

G. sanguineum 

G. lucidum 

Ehamnus catharticus 

Anthyllis vulneraria 

Hippocrepis comosa 

Eubus saxatilis 

R. caesius 

Rosa pimpinellifolia 
R. mollissima 
Geum intermedium 
Potentilla alpestris 
Pyrus rupicola 

Dryas octopetala (nearly at Amcliffe) 
Circsea intermedia 
Hippuris vulgaris 
Ribes Smithianum 

N.S., Vol. ix. Sept. 1883o 



Sedum Telephium 

Saxifraga granulata 

S. hypnoides 

S. tridactylites 
-^Parnassia palustris 

Cornus sanguinea 

Adoxa Moscbatellina 

Galium sylvestre 

Valeriana dioica 

Scabiosa columbaria 
--Carduus nutans 

C. crispus 
— C heterophyllus 

Carlina vulgaris 

Gnaphalium dioicum 

Leontodon bispidus 

Taraxacum erythrospermunl 

Lactuca muralis 

Crepis paludosa 

Hieracium caesium 

H. pallidum 

H. Gibsoni 

H. murorum 

H. gothicum 

H. vulgatum 

H. vulgatum var. maculatum 

Campanula latifolia 

Vaccinium Oxycoccos 

Menyanthes trifoliata 

Polemonium coeruleum 

Veronica Anagallis 

Pedicularis palustris 

Thymus Serpyllum (white-flowered) 

Myosotis sylvatica 

M. collina 

M. caispitosa 

Pinguicula vulgaris 

Primula farinosa 



26 



The Naturalist. 



Plantago media 
Polygonum Bistorta 
Salix nigricans 
S. repens 

Potomogeton lucens 
P. densus 
P. perfoliatus 
Orchis incarnata 
Gymnadenia albida 
Gr. conopsea 
Habenaria viridis 
Epipactis ovalis 
Paris quadrifolia 
Convallaria majalis 
Narthecium ossifragum 
Juncus glaucns 
Blysmus compressiis 
Scirpus pauciflorus 
Eriophorum latifolium 
Carex dioica 
C. pulicaris 
C. fulva 
C. lepidocarpa 

C. capillaris 

Among plants tliat have been 

Meconopsis cambrica 
Hesperis matronalis 
Rumex scutatus 
Lamium maculatum 
Tilia intermedia 

Sphagnum acutifoliura 
S. acut. var. deflexum 
Gymnostomum tortile 
G. curvirostrum 
Weissa viridula var. densifolia 
Seligeria pusilla 
Ditricum flexicaule 

D. flex. var. densum 
Trichostomum tophaceum 
T. mutabile 
T. crispulum 
T. crisp, var. elatum 
Barbula recurvifolia 
B rigidula 
B. revoluta 
B. tortuosa 
B. intermedia 
B. ruralis 
B. siibulata 
Encalypta vulgaris 

E. vulg. var. pilifera 
E. streptocarpa 
Hacomitrium laniiginosum 
P. canescens 
Zygodon viridissimus 
Z. Nowellii 
CJlota Bruchii 
Orthotrichum saxatile 
O. cnpulatum 



C. teretiusculai 
C. pilulifera 
C. ampuUacea 
C. vesicaria 
C. paludosa 
C. disticha 
C. remota 
C. bin er vis 
C. hirta 

Sesleria coerulea 
Avena pubescens- 
A. alpina 

A. flavescens 
Koehleria cristatai 
Poa nemoralis 
Festuca loliacea 
F. duriuscula 
Asplenium viride 
Cystopteris fragilis 
Aspidium lonchitidioides 
Poly podium Robertianum 
Ophioglossum vulgatum 
Botrychium Lunaria 
Selaginella selaginoides 

introduced are the following five : — 

O. Lyellii 

feplachnum sphaericum ' 
Funaria calcarea 
Bartramia ffideri 
Breutelia arcuata 
Zieria julacea 
Bryum bimum 

B. pallens 

B. pseudotriquetum 
B. roseum 
Cinclidium stygium 
Mnium cuspidatum 
M. affine var. elatum 
M. rostratum 
M. serratum 
M. stellare 
M. subglobosum 

Fontinalis antipyretica var. gracilis et 

gigantea 
Fissidens crassipes 
Antitrichia curtipendula 
Neckera crispa 
N. complanata 
Homalia trichomanoides 
, Anomodon viticulosus, with fruit 
Pseudoleskea catenulata 
Cylindrothecium concinnum 
Orthothecium intricatum 
O. rufescens 

Brachythecium glareosum 
B. rivulare 

Eurhynchium myosuroides 
E. striatum 
E. piliferum 
I E. 8wartzii 



West : Principal Plants of Malham. 27 



E. Teesdalii 

Rhynchostegium tenellum 
R. murale 

Plagiothecium pulchellum 
Hypnum revolvens 
H. scorpioides 

H. filicinum (several varieties) 
H. commutatum (in various forms) 
H. falcatum 
H. virescens 
H. rugosum 

H. cupressiforme (several varieties) 

H. chry Sophy Hum 

H. stellatum 

H. stel. var. protensum 

H. giganteum 

H. Schreberi 

H. stramineum 

H. scorpioides 

H. splendens 



Marchantia polymorpha 

Conocephalus conicus 

Aster ella hemisphserica 

Frullania Tamarisci 

F. dilatata 

Lejeunia ecliinata 

Radula complanata 

Porella laevigata 

P. platyphylla 

P. rivularis 

Cephalozia Sphagni 

Chiloscyphus polyanthus var. rivularis 

Lophocolea bidentata 

Scapania aequiloba 

Plagiochila asplenioides (in variety) 

Jungermannia riparia 

J. Schreberi 

Aneura multifida 

Metzgeria furcata (a large form) 



CoUema flaccidum 
Leptogium lacerum 
Cladonia pyxidata 
C. uncialis 
C. rangiferina 
Usnea barbata 
Evernia furfuracea 
E. prunastri 
Ramalina farinacea 
R. fraxinia 
R. farinosa 
Peltigera canina 
P. polydactyla 
Solorina saccata 
S. limbata 



Parmelia olivacea 
P. saxatilis (in variety) 
P. physodes do. 
P. per lata 

Physcia parietina (in variety) 
P. stellaris do. 
Placodium murorum 
Lecanora subfusca 
L. calcarea 
L. parella 
L. rupestris 
Pertusaria fallax 
P. communis 

Lecidea coeruleo-nigricans 
L. capillaris 
Arthonia astroidea 
Graphis scripta 
Endocarpon miniatum 
E. min. var, complicatum 
E. rufescens 
E. fluviatile 
Verrucaria calciseda 



Pleurotus hypnophilua 
Tremella mesenterica 
^cidium albescens 
J^. violas 
JE. crassum 
Puccinia hieracii 
P. adoxse 

Protomyces chrysosplenii 
Urocystis violae 
Triphragmium ulmarige 
Stigmatea Robertiani 
Peziza stercorea 
Dothidea graminis 

Oocardium stratum (not recorded 
before) 

Arthrosiphon alatus do. 
Calothrix mirabilis 
Scytonema myochrous 
Spirogyra nitida 
Hormiscia zonata 
Zonotrichia calcarea 
Chroolepus aureum 
Pinnularia viridis 
Meridion circulars 
Amphora ovalis 
Synedra ulna 
Cocconema cymbiforme 
Nostoc rupestre 
Oscillaria irrigua 
Epithemia turgida 
Gomphonema acuminatum 



Bradford, 

August, 1883. 



CAMPYLOPUS BREVIFOLIUS, Sch. 
a SUBULATUS, Ejusd. 



By H. Boswell. 

ly the hope of finding something further about the Bryum gemraiparum 
lately alluded to, and perhaps of falling in with it in some other" 
stream, Mr. Ley and I have lately visited Breconshire, and explored 
a good deal of it together, but v^ithout success. We found the Bryum 
only near the original spot where it was first met with by Mr. 
Ley, in May, nor did we obtain anything else of much interest, 
though we explored a good many miles, till our last day, when we 
fell in with a moss by the side of the Wye, which is remarkable in 
more points than one. 

At first glance it rather reminded one of Gampylopus fragilis^ yet 
was different from any form I had seen of that moss, which varies a 
good deal. Arrived at home, I soon, with the aid of the microscope, 
found it to be identical with the (7. brevifolius, of Schimper's Bryol. 
Europ. Suppl. — which also appears to be identical with 0. suhulatm 
of the same author, and either name fits the plant well enough, though 
the latter will claim priority of date. 

Its much shorter pointed leaves and narrower cells at once dis- 
tinguish it from C. fragilis, and bring it nearer to G. Schimperi^ but 
that has a cluster of diaphanous vesicular cells near the base of the 
leaf on each side, absent in hrf^vifoUus. 

But though agreeing very well in the leaf structure, there was one 
great difference apparent. C. hrevifolius is described by Schimper,. 
and by Dr. Braithwaite, in the sixth part, lately issued, of his 
" British Moss Flora," as a dwarfish species, and with this account 
specimens from Forfarshire, Italy, and Germany entirely agree. 
Grown on dry granitic or basaltic rocks, they present a very starved 
appearance, and are barely half-an-inch in height ; the Wye plants, 
on the contrary, have grown freely, and make much handsomer 
specimens when dried — their aspect being so different, that I could 
hardly persuade one or two of my friends to accept the determination. 
In fact, though the leaves present no tangible character, this aspect 
of the moss is so different from that of the forms hitherto known, 
that it may be well to mark it as a variety, characterised thus : — 

C. brevl/oUus, Schpr.. 

C. suhnlatus^ ejusd., Braithw. 
var. eloHgatus. 



Williams : Louis Agassiz. 



29 



Tufts broad, extensive, solid and dense. Stems slender, elongate, 
1 to 2 inclies, copiously radiculose below, repeatedly innovating, with 
fasciculate branches above ; branches without radicles. Leaves as 
in the minor form. 

Hab. Muddy banks of the Wye, near Builth, in company with 
Tortula cylindrical Hypna^ &c. 



LOUIS AGASSIZ. 



By Rev. S. Fletcher Williams." 
( Continued. ) 

In the winter of 18G5, having long been engaged with untiring zeal in 
the cultivation of his favourite pursuits, Agassiz was compelled by the 
state of his health to rest from work, and seek change of scene and 
climate. Europe," he says, w^as proposed ; but, though there is 
much enjoyment for a naturalist in contact with the active scientific 
life of the Old World, there is little intellectual rest. Towards Brazil 
I was drawn by a life-long desire. After the death of Spix, when a 
student of twenty years of age, I had been employed by Mastius to 
describe the fishes they had brought with them from their celebrated 
Brazilian journey. From that time, the wish to study this fauna in 
the regions where it belongs had been an ever-recurring thought with 
me ; a scheme deferred for want of opportunity, but never quite 
forgotten." But Agassiz was quite unwilling to visit Brazil on a mere 
vacation tour. To him, as to all true scientific workers, complete rest 
was distasteful. On the other hand, he was conscious that he could 
effect little working alone. " I could not forget," he wrote, that 
had I only the necessary means, I might make collections on this 
journey which would place the Museum in Cambridge (U.S.) on a 
level with the first institution of the kind. But for this a working 
force would be needed, and I saw no possibility of providing for such 
an undertaking." Whilst he was still considering where to apply for 
aid in this emergency, Mr. Nathaniel Thayer, unasked, offered to pay 
all the expenses, personal and scientific, of six assistants. Agassiz 
accepted this munificent offer. Let it be remarked, in passing, that 
subsequently Mr. Thayer did much more than he had promised, 
continuing to meet all the expenses which w^ere incurred until the last 
specimen was stored in the Cambridge Museum. The assistants who 
sailed with Agassiz were, Mr. James Burkhardt, the artist ; Mr. John G. 
Anthony, conchologist ; Mr. Frederick C. Hartt and Mr. Orestes St. 



30 



The Naturalist. 



John, geologists ; Mr. John A. Allen, ornithologist ; and Mr. George 
Sceva, preparator of specimens. 

The results of this celebrated expedition are described by Agassiz 
and his wife in the charming work entitled A Journey in Brazil. 
Agassiz justly remarked that they served to show that their year, 
full as it was of enjoyment for all the party, was also rich in perma- 
nent results for science."^ After this voyage Agassiz devoted a large 
share of his time to the examination of the immense Brazilian 
collections stored in the Museum at Cambridge. Before long, how- 
ever, his health began to show signs of failing him again, and the 
work of examination proceeded more slowly than he had hoped and 
anticipated. His scientific activity, however, was not over. He took 
a part in the great controversies of the day, gave a series of lectures 
in New York on the Geology of the American Continent, and in the 
summer of 1871 joined an exploring expedition to the South Atlantic 
and Pacific shores of the Continent. A careful exploration was made 
of the celebrated Sargasso sea, and a nest-building fish was discovered 
in that vast bed of oceanic vegetation ; and other important contribu- 
tions were made to natural science. A course of lectures on The 
Method of Creation" afforded him the opportunity of stating his 
decided objections to Mr. Darwin's theory of Natural Selection, and 
of propounding his own view that species do not insensibly pass into 
each other, but that each has its own appointed period, and is not 
connected, except in the order of time, with its predecessor. His 
career closed unexpectedly in 1874, among a people whose love he 
won by his warm-hearted, earnest, and active nature. Abundant were 
the proofs of their full appreciation of him, in the liberality of Mr. 
Abbott Lawrence and of Mr. Thayer ; and to these were added, in 
1873 — a year before his decease — the gift by Mr. Anderson, a rich 
tobacco merchant of New York, of the island of Penikese, one of the 



4 Agassiz was constantly sending to the Cambridge Museum such vast and 
apparently endless numbers of specimens from Brazil that one of the trustees, and 
Agassiz's most intimate personal friend, Mr. George Ticknor, wrote, in January, 
18(56, beseeching him to desist, as "it would not be possible to erect all the 
buildings and provide all the scientific service, attendance, and materials necessary 
to protect and m-aintain in good condition such masses of siDecimens, and make 
them intelligible and useful." Besides, the collections were already much larger 
than Agassiz could submit to such investigations as he intended to make, even 
should he live to a fabulous age ! Further, says Mr. Ticknor, " ihose who know best 
assure me that the time you are now giving to the accumulation of si^ecimens — 
which may, after all, perish for the want of the means needful to protect them — 
might, in their judgment, be better employed for your own fame, and for the 
advancement of such scientific investigations as you can make better than any man 
alive, and without which these same vast collections might as well remain in 
their blind kegs, in the dark cellar where they are hidden away, and so your vast 
personal labours and disinterested sacrifices, in bringing them together, be mainly 
\o^\:'— Ticknor' 8 Life, Vol. II., pp. 386-87. 



Williams : Louis Agassiz. 



31 



Elizabeth islands nortli of New York, with funds to establish there a 
Marine Naturalists' School. The last year of Agassiz's life was spent 
chiefly on this island, training up a group of young naturalists. When 
he died he left both hemispheres, wherever science is honoured, in 
mourning ; and he left behind him a name with no soil upon it to 
stain its honour, and the reputation of one who in every relation of 
life had nobly and purely done his part — who, as husband, parent, 
citizen, philosopher, was blameless among men. 

To give any really intelligible account of Agassiz's enormous labours 
through his lifetime would require the compass of a good-sized 
treatise. I must content myself with the remark that he worked 
with a definite aim, and that his studies were undertaken with 
reference to some general question, and made a test of the value and 
soundness of some general principle. The papers and works upon 
echinoderms aimed at a classification of these animals, and a better 
appreciation of their structural differences from the other types. The 
monographs upon shells, living and fossil, were prepared with a view 
of testing the range of distribution of species in past ages, and the 
limits of their special characters. The researches on fossil fishes are 
intended to show the relations of living and fossil species, and their 
embryonic development in one of the most extensive classes of the 
animal kingdom, the existence of which upon earth may be traced 
back to the earliest periods in which animal life was called into being. 
The investigations upon the glaciers were called forth by a desire to 
connect the history of the physical changes our globe has undergone 
with the phenomena exhibited by the developments of the organic 
kingdom." Everywhere in his works we discover a tendency to the 
most extensive generalisations ; while in every instance the knowledge 
of the facts, a candid study of the most minute relations of his 
subjects, was his constant aim in all Lis investigations. It is true that 
some of his generalisations are now of little interest. For instance, in 
his time naturalists and theologians .were in a heated discussion on 
the unity of the human race. The doctrine of the immutability of 
species was pushed by some to such an extreme that they declared it 
incredible that the different races of men could have descended from 
a single pair. Agassiz was an advocate of this view, maintaining that 
the human race had had, in its several distinct types, separate stocks 
of originality, both as to time and place j and to his own generation 
his own name was a terror to orthodox interpreters of the Bible. Even 
in 1872 Dr. Charles Hodge made the assertion that the unity of the 
human race is denied by ''a large and increasing class of scientific 



32 



The Naturalist. 



men."^ It would gratify a good deal of curiosity if the learned doctor 
had informed his readers from what ranks this " large class of scientific 
men " who disbelieve in the unity of the human race is receiving so 
many recruits ; for it seems to appear on the face of almost all recent 
works scientifically treating the subject of vegetable or animal life, 
that the question of the day is not only whether the human races are of 
common origin, but whether the whole animal kingdom may not have 
descended in unbroken lines from one progenitor. 

On this point Agassiz held very decided opinions. His searching 
and comprehensive inquisitions into nature led him to the belief of 
distinct types of the animal kingdom, and to the belief of specific 
creations of those distinct types ; and the theories of Darwin have had 
no opponent so able and thoroughly scientific as he. I will quote 
from him a passage which sums up his views. In 1863 he wrote as 
follows : — " One important truth already assumes great significance in 
the history of the growth of animals • namely, that whatever the 
changes may be through which an animal passes, and however different 
the aspect of these phases at successive periods may appear, they are 
always limited by the character of the type to which the animal 
belongs, and never pass that boundary. Thus, the Eadiate begins life 
with characters peculiar to Radiates, and ends it without assuming 
any feature of a higher type. The Mollusk starts with a character 
essentially its own, in no way related to the Radiates, and never shows 
the least tendency to deviate from it, either in the direction of the 
Articulate or Vertebrate types. This is equally true of the Articulates 

[and] emphatically true of the Vertebrates These 

results are of the highest importance at this moment, when men of 
authority in science are attempting to renew the theory of a general 
transmutation of all animals of the higher types out of the lower ones. 
If such views are ever to deserve serious consideration, and be acknow- 
. ledged as involving a scientific principle, it will only be when their 
supporters shall have shown that the fundamental plans of structure 
characteristic of the primary groups of the animal kingdom are trans- 
mutable, or pass into one another, and that their different modes of 
development may lead from one to the other. Thus far embryology 
has not recorded one fact on which to base such doctrines."^ 

The argument is here somewhat mis-stated. Darwin's principal 
point is to prove that each of these types has developed into its various 

^ Systematic Theology, Vol. II., pp. 77. 

6 Methods of Study in Natural History, by G. L. Agassii, Boston, 1871, pp. 



Williams : Louis AcxAssiz. 



3B 



orders, genera, and species. Back to the point at which the charac- 
teristics of the class appear, the analogical argument from embryology 
is very strong. Previous to that stage of development Darwin would 
go only so far as the momentum of his analogical argument at the 
beginning of the classes would carry him. If, however, a naturalist 
has been brought by plain analogies to believe in only four distinct 
lines of genealogical descent, it is difficult to stop there, although 
there may be no further accessible facts on which to base a positive 
argument, just as in the realms of astronomy we can hardly help 
applying our general conclusions to regions of space beyond the reach 
of the telescope. Unless there is counter evidence we may sometimes 
extend our generalizations a long way beyond the bare facts, and 
throw the burden of proof upon those who deny such extension. This 
is akin to the argument known in mechanics as the method of proof 
by gradual approach. ^ 

But, whatever we may think of some of Agassiz's generalisations, 
we must all admit that his productions testify to an amazing fund of 
knowledge, to an equally amazing fertility of genius, and to an almost 
incredible industry. 

What I note, in addition to the vast knowledge and intellectual 
greatness of the man, is his admirable and noble character. He had a 
remarkable sweetness of disposition. There was always around him a 
sunny atmosphere, and it is said by his most intimate friends that none 
could be with him without feeling the magnetism of his great, warm 
heart. His pupils — and they are alike numerous and cultivated — bear 
jconsenting testimony to his cheerful and affectionate spirit, his 
cordial interest in their prosperity and success, and his large, strong 
sympathies with all that appeals to generous human sensibilities. He 
inspired them with all the ardour of his own bright and pure enthu- 
siasm, and nothing that was mean or selfish could thrive in the 
earnestness of the pursuit of truth in which he engaged them. It is 
easy, therefore, to see how they revered and loved him. There could 
be no better evidence of his genial, affectionate, sympathetic disposition 
than the power that he had over ardent and gifted natures, and the 

7 Agassiz's candour in stating facts was such as sometimes to convei t his students 
to the doctrine he was confuting. So recently as March 4th, 1883, the Kev. George 
Batchelor, in a sermon in Unity Church, Chicago, said : — " I studied under Asa 
Gray and Jeffries Wyman at the time when in their respective departments — 
botany and comparative anatomy — they were compelled to admit the doctrine of 
evolution ; and I listened to or read the lectures in which Agassiz stated the facts 
upon which he based his system with so much fairness and candour that he con- 
yerted to the doctrine of evolution, which he opposed, his whole class, including his 
3on, who succeeded him, and who now carries oji his work." — Chicago Times, 
March 5th, 1883, 



34 



The Naturalist. 



sweet impressions he left on tlie lives of so many of the truest and 
most interesting people in both America and Europe. 

There was in him, too, a simplicity, a child-like naturalness, as 
admirable as it was instinctive. With the half-educated — those 
ambitious merely of the name of learning — there is often noticed a 
conceit of knowledge, an ostentation of attainments, an assumption of 
superiority, a kind of dogmatism and arrogance, which are as repulsive 
as they are absurd. There was no shadow of this in Agassiz. With 
all his mental grandeur and vast acquirements, he was still the humble 
pupil of nature, the unpretending citizen, the quiet, urbane, courteous 
gentlemen. In his simple, natural way he went about his work 
intent upon accomplishing the ends of science, and oblivious 
apparently of what the world was thinking of him. In his lectures, 
his private instructions and social intercourse, his travels, and his 
fatiguing and exacting labours, he carried a serene and artless spirit, 
whose sincerity was winning and impressive. He was utterly free 
from the affectations of the pedant, and the robust genuineness of the 
man had a wholesome and stimulating flavour that made his society 
delightful. 

(To he concluded.) 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
leveL 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
3-20 


16 


19-48 


^17-45 


21 


0-95 


Halifax...(F. G. S. Eawson) 


365 


311 


19 


24-35 


31-48 


21 


0-83 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


13-25 


22 


16-69 


tl3-12 


20 


0-90 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


3-89 


20 


19-62 


J18-44 


21 


0-98 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


3-80 


20 


18-78 


17-69 


20 


1-06 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


4-52 


22 


26.58 


25-23 


21 


1-22 


Wentworth Castle (do.)... 


520 


3-40 


15 


20-66 


18-53 


2 


1-06 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


2-84 


18 


14-35 


18-48 


20 


0-75 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


3.12 


17 


11-36 


14-94 


2 


0-85 



? Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. f Average of 29 years, 1853-62 & 1865-83. 
J Average of 14 years, 1870-83. 



Cuckoo's Egg m Ring Ouzel's Nest. — On the 19th May I found a ring 
ouzel's nest on Harden Moor, which was then approaching completion. 
A few days after, two of my boys visited the nest, and found it to contain 
three eggs, one of which they brought in addition to a strange egg, which 
I at once recognised as that of a cuckoo. This is the first instance that 
has come to my knowledge of the cuckoo consigning its charge to the care 
of this species ; and this curious fact in its economy is the more surprising 
since there were, within a short distance of the nest in question, two tit- 
lark's nests, both of which contained fresh laid eggs. — E. P. P. Butier- 
FiELD, Wilsden, June 4th. 

Dunlin at Malham, &c. — During a ramble to Malham on Whit- 
Tuesday, my brother and T were much interested in observing the dunlin 
( Tringa variabilis) about a marshy place near Malham Tarn. My attention 
was attracted to it from hearing some strange notes which I did not 
remember having heard before, and going surreptitiously in the direction 
indicated by the sound, I got within half-a-dozen yards of what I took to 
be the male bird, which was perched upon a wall. We searched some 
time for the nest, but without success, as we felt sure the female was 
sitting somewhere not far away. Its tameness somewhat surprised us, a 
missile being necessary to be thrown in order to make it fly, although 
only a few yards of water separated us. The number of birds breeding 
about the Tarn and moor was remarkable, and their cries bewildering — 
but still, I thought, according well with surroundings so wild, and in 
many respects unique. — E. P. P. Buttehfield, June 4th. 

ENTOMOLOGICAL NOTES.— On June 2nd, Mr. Geo. Tindall and 
I had another search in the Green Farm Wood, Doncaster, for the larvse 
of Phycis hetulella, and each of us succeeded in finding specimens, mostly 
nearly full-grown, on the birch leaves. In the same wood, too, we 
collected larvae of Tethea subtusa from poplars, a species which does not 
seem to have been hitherto recorded from Doncaster. During May three 
beautiful Acronycta alni appeared in my breeding cages, one of them 
from the larva I found in Edlington Wood, Doncaster, on August 5th 
last. — Geo. T. Porritt. 

— Grassington. — On August 5th, I took M. expolita (one specimen), 
flying leisurely in the hot sunshine about guelder rose (VibmiiU7n 
opulus) in Grass high wood, Grassington, and saw one, if not two more. 
It was in much better condition than the one I took at the same place 
last year, and perhaps if the date of my visit had been fixed a little 
earlier, or I had stayed in the wood longer, I might have taken a few 
more specimens. I also took one (7. imidentaria near Threshfield. My 
brother, who paid us a visit a few days previously, turned up L. olivata 
freely about the highway in Grass wood, and I took one at Threshfield, 



36 



The Naturalist. 



and beat a few from spruce firs in Grass high. wood. Mr. Carter and 
myself took Tortrix icterana commonly at the same place last June.— 
E. P. P. BuTTERFiELD, Wilsden, August 20th. 

— Lepidopteka m Abbott's Wood, Sussex. — On May 23rd, in company 
with Mr. W. H. B. Fletcher, of Worthing, I had a few hours' collecting 
in Abbott's Wood, Hailsham. We hoped to get a good series of Agrotera 
nemoralis, but it seemed to be only just getting out, as only four specimens 
were beaten out of the hornbeams. The season indeed seemed to be as 
late as here in the north, and many species I took there near the same 
date some years ago were not seen at all. Those taken or observed 
included Gonepteryx rhamni, common ; Argynnis Euphrosyney abundant ; 
Syrichthus Alveolus, Thanaos Tages ; Nola cristulalis, at rest, head d..^wn- 
wards as usual ; Venilia maculata and Tephrosia consonaria, both 
common ; Ephyra pendularia, Astliena candidata, abundant ; Enpithecia 
plumbeolata, very fine ; E. ahbrevidta ; Coremia propngjiata ; Platypteryx 
lacertida and P. falcula ; Herminia harhalis^ common ; Ennychia octo- 
maculalis ; Roxana arcuana, &c., &c. — Geo. T. Porritt. 

— Occurrence of Chesias ohliquaria at Donc aster. — I was engaged 
setting some captures on the 14th of June, rather late, with the window 
before me partly open, when I became aware of the presence of moths 
attracted by the gaslight, by their scorched bodies falling on the table in 
front of me. Looking up, I saw several moths at the window and on the 
wall, on capturing which I was surprised to find a fine fresh G. ohliquaria. 
This is, I believe, the first record of its occurrence in Yorkshire. — 
G. TiNDALL, July 24th, 1883. 

BOTANICAL QUERIES.— Referring to the Naturalist of the past 
month of August, under Short Notes and Queries," page 20, would 
not the old name of Epipactis ensifolia be better expressed by Cephalan- 
thera ensifolial Those, like myself, who take the ^' Student's Flora " as 
the standard work on British plants think so. [Both names were sent to 
us, and we, unfortunately, crossed out the later one, and did not 
notice it until too late. — Eds. Nat.'] — In the same part, under Reports 
of Societies," Ptucedanum officinale, a very rare plant of salt marshes, 
and known previously to occur at only two or three south-coast stations, 
is recorded for Thorne Waste. If a Peucedanum at all, is it not more 
likely to be Peucedanum palustre 1 — At the Bank Holiday Meeting, Aug. 
6th, of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, in the Washburn Valley, three 
good plants were observed, viz. — Viola tricolor, sub-sp. liitea, var. 
amoena ; Carex panicidata ; and Asplenium Ceterach. Some of us won- 
dered why these do not appear among The Rarer Plants of the 
Washburn Valley District," given in West Yorkshire." — P. F. Lee, 
Sec. Bot. Sect., Y.N.U. 

NOTICES OF BOOKS, &c.— The British Moss-Flora, by Dr. 
Braithwaite, Part VII." — We have now received another part of this 
grand work, containing part iii. of the Dicranaceoe^ and must at once take 



REfoETs OF Societies. 



37 



the opportunity of again congratulating its talented and industrious 
author on the care and labour he has already taken in producing this* 
lasting monument of his industry and zeal in moss-lore. The plates, six 
in number, are even superior to those previously issued, and leave 
nothing to be desired either in detail or execution. Amongst other 
alterations in nomenclature on Wilson's Bry. Brit., we notice that 
Dicranum vire7is, JJ. polycarpum, Cynodontium Brimtoni, and Rhabdo- 
weissia fugax are referred to Ofichophorus, which also includes 0. Wahleii- 
hergii and var. compactas, 0. strumifer, 0. gracilescens (Cynodontium^ 
Sch. Syn.^, and 0. crispatiis (Weissia denticidata, Sch. Syn.) ; whilst 
Trichostomum glaucescens becomes Scelania ccesia (Yill. ) Lindberg. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting 14th Aug. , the president^ 
Mr. T. Lister, in the chair. — The new list of British birds drawn up by 
the Ornithologists' Union was laid on the table — the standard of nomen- 
clature so much needed to be uniformly used. Letters from Mr. R. 
Creighton confirmed his report of May 6 that the black redstart, waxwingj, 
and greenshank all occurred near Hemsworth. There are but one or two 
instances of the black redstart in Yorkshire, and only one of its occurring 
in May, which was in Cornwall ; it is chiefly a winter visitor in the south- 
west of England. Three instances of the waxwing have occurred in the 
Barnsley district within two years. The greenshank is equally rare. He 
also records the black-headed gull, and sandpipers at Hemsworth dam ; 
the latter breed there, also in the Dearne valley, and at Ingbirchworth 
and Dunford reservoirs. In excursions to Langsett and Mickleden 
moors to the Derbyshire border, increased numbers of ring-ouzels, twites, 
or mountain linnets (young and old), were seen, also kestrel, plovers golden 
and green, in abundance. Curlews are reported breeding on these moors. 
Swifts, young and old, numerous near Monk Bretton Abbey — very rare 
in Barnsley of late years. Mr. E. Hailstone reported on July 20th, a 
tern over Walton Lake. Hawfinches and gold-crested wrens have bred 
at Round Green ; goldfinches at Middle wood Hall, Darfield. — T. L. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting July 24th, Mr. J. W. 
Carter, the president, in the chair. — Mr. lUingworth described a ramble 
about Witherslack, and amongst the insects he exhibited were H. auro- 
raria, E. russida, L. Alexis, &c. He also exhibited a live young cuckoo 
and the tit-lark's nest in which it was taken, on Baildon Moor. Mr. Soppitt 
exhibited a number of parasitic fungi, among which was one growing on 
Lactuca muralis, viz, Puccinea ruhigo-vera from Hawksworth, the bird's 
nest fungus, and a smut on Bromns mollis. Among the insects exhibited 
by the president were, one new to the district (P. dentatiis), from 
Shipley Glen, and T. tapetzella, a small moth, the larva of which feeds on 



38 



The NA.TURALIST. 



cloth. Mr. Andrews reported a fungus, Boletus hiridus, found at Gras- 
sington, which has not been recorded before in this district. Mr. West 
gave a Hst of sedges found about Hawksworth. Mr. Waddington sent 
a specimen of Bhagium inquisator^ from Horton, a species new to the 
district. 

Meeting, August 7th. — Mr. Soppitt gave a report of a ramble with the 
Y.N.U. to Washburn valley, where were found Nephrodium Oreopteris, 
Equisetum hyemale, and E. limmum {E. hyemale not recorded before), 
also, Uredo hifrons and Syncliitrium taraxaci also new, and Carex 
jpanicidata, found there for the first time. Mr. Firth reported having 
observed the cole titmouse at Shipley Glen. Mr. West gave an account 
of a walk over Thornton moor, with a description of the various species 
of scale mosses found there. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting, July 
30th, the Rev. S. F. Williams occupying the chair in the absence of the 
president. — Mr. A. O. Walker (Chester) read a paper entitled A 
consideration of some of the causes affecting the distribution of the 
Lepidoptera of Great Britain," in which he showed, by a comparison of 
the lepidopterous fauna of several districts, that the number of species of 
butterflies and moths whose larvae feed upon trees became much more 
numerous than those whose larvae feed upon herbaceous plants, as we 
proceed easterly or south-easterly. Meteorological observations show 
that the easterly and south-easterly portions of our island are warmer, 
therefore drier, than the north or north-west, and from this fact, and the 
known injurious effects of wet food upon caterpillars, he deduced the 
principal cause affecting the distribution of at least tree-feeding lepidop- 
tera as being the presence of more or less moisture in the atmosphere. 
The paper led to an interesting discussion. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Washbqrndale, Aug. 6th. — The 
Bank Holiday Monday this year was planned for the exploration of the 
secluded and picturesque valley of the Washburn, the meetings being 
held at Otley. There was a heavy shower of rain in the forenoon, but 
the weather cleared up at noon, and was afterwards brilliantly fine and 
sunny. Three parties had been arranged for. Of these, Mr. Clarke led 
a party from Poole Station past the pretty village of Leathley, 
through Lindley Wood and round the reservoir to Otley. Other mem- 
bers drove from Otley to Blubberhouses, and under the guidance of 
Messrs. Grassham and Roebuck, who were kindly and ably assisted by 
Mr. Thomas Harrison, Lord Walsingham's agent, explored the valley 
upwards to West End. Returning to Blubberhouses the party returned 
to Otley by conveyance. Other members explored Washburn individually, 
and others again did not explore it at all, but visited Otley Chevin and 
other parts of the main dale of Wharfe. The tea and meetings were all 
at the White Horse Hotel, Otley. At the general meeting, Mr. J. W. 
Davis, F.S.A., of Halifax, president of the Gee logical Section, presided. 



d 



Reports of Societies. 



39 



The minutes were taken as read. On the roll-call it was found that the 
60 or 70 members present during the day represented 14 societies, viz : — 
Barnsley, Wakefield, Elland -cum - Greetland, Bradford Naturalists, 
Leeds (3), Goole, Selby, Huddersfield Lit. and Scient., Dewsbury, 
Halifax, Ilkley, and Shipley. The following new members, having been 
duly proposed and seconded, were elected : — Mr. J. F. T. Spiking of 
Birstall, Mr. J. S. Hurst of Copt Hewick Hall, near Ripon, Rev. Henry 
Smith of Redcar, Mr. G. H. L. Rickards of Poole, near Otley, Mr. R. 
Paver-Crow, J. P., of Ornhams Hall, near Boroughbridge, Dr. S. H. 
Kerr, M.A., of Otley, and Mr. James Backhouse, jun., of York. Thanks 
were then unanimously voted, on the proposition of Messrs. John 
Grassham, Leeds, and Vincent Taylor, Ilkley, to Lord Walsingham, Mr. 
Ayscough Fawkes, J. P., of Farnley, and the Leeds Corporation, for 
permission to visit their estates and the margins of the reservoirs, and to 
Mr. Harrison, Lord Walsingham's agent, for guiding one of the parties. 
There was a little discussion as to the Union being represented at the 
Southport meeting of the British Association, and it was agreed that in 
case of the inability of the president to attend, his place should be taken 
by Mr. C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., of Huddersfield, a member of the Y.N.U. 
executive. The sectional reports were then given. For the Botanical 
Section Mr. P. F. Lee, Dewsbury, secretary of the section, stated that 
the picturesque little valley had during the day yielded 252 different 
species of the flowering plants, ferns, charas, &c., contained in the 
London Catalogue of British Plants. Of these, 13 were ferns — without 
doubt a goodly list, considering the limited area worked — among them 
being Asplenium Ceterach, Nephrodium spinulosum, N. Oreopteris 
(abundant on the margin of Dob Wood), and Polypodium Phegopteris. 
In the list of phanerogams collected were the undermentioned, as repre- 
senting the best finds : — Ranunculus Lenormandi, Yiola tricolor, sub-sp. 
lutea, var. amoena (on the summit of the left bank of Washburn Dale)^ 
Malva Moschata, Gnaphalium sylvaticum, Lactuca muralis. Campanula 
latifolia, Linaria minor, Veronica montana, Galeopsis Tetrahit, sub-sp, 
speciosa (G. versicolor, Curt.), Hnmulus lupulus, Typha latifolia, the 
broad-leaved Helleborine, Epipactis latifolia. On the margin of a mill- 
race in the lower part of the valley were fine tussocks of the great 
panicled sedge, Carex paniculata, with nearly 4ft. stems ; the graceful 
Aira caryophyllea, and Chara flexilis. Mr. H. T. Soppitt reported having 
seen and collected 33 species of fungi, amongst which were Helotium 
seruginosum, Calocera viscosa, Coleosp>orium campanulse, Puccinea 
poarum, Uredo vacciniorum. Boletus luteus, B. flavus, Lactarius rufus^ 
Marasmius rotula. For the Geological Section its president, Mr. Davis^, 
reported that it had been intended to drive from Harrogate to Blubber- 
houses, and thence walk down the valley to Otley, but the weather 
during the early part of the day being unfavourable, a short excursion 
was made to the millstone grit quarry at Little Wonder, Harrogate, 
where the president gave a brief outline of the geology of the district^ 



40 



The Naturalist. 



mentioning the anticlinal of Yoredale rocks, forced to the surface south- 
west of the town, the numerous faults in connection with which gave rise 
to the several springs for which Harrogate is so famous, and the general 
arrangement of the kinder scout grits, whose outcrop may be seen, for 
example, at Birk Crag. The party then proceeded by rail to Otley ; the 
weather had cleared up, and the valley of the Wharfe was seen to great 
advantage — the outcrop of the sandstone at Great Aimer Cliff, and the 
undulating but hilly country to the north of the river, and the precipitous 
cliffs constituting Otley Chevin on the south, presenting a very pleasing 
picture. The ascent of Otley Chevin was made, the exertion being well 
repaid by the magnificent view obtained from the summit. The whole of 
the hills opposite are composed of kinder grit, which dipped southwards 
Under the Chevin ; the third grit series being exposed on the slope of the 
hill, surmounted by the upper thick-bedded grit of that series, being the 
same bed of rock of which the Cow and Calf are composed. The south 
slope of the Chevin dips under the rough rock and coal measures beyond 
Yeadon. For vertebrate zoology Mr. W. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., as 
secretary of the section, reported that most of the resident and summer 
visitants amongst the birds of the district had been observed, but no 
additional species had been added to the list furnished in last month's 
Naturalist. A kingfisher had been observed at Lindley — a fact which is 
worthy of mention, as the bird is extremely rare in the Washburn. In 
the other classes of vertebrates, no species had been added to the lists 
given in the August number of the Naturalist. In the absence of the 
officers of the Conch ological Section, Mr. W. Denison Roebuck stated 
that two additions — Limax Isevis and Pisidium pusillum, both from 
Blubberhouses — had been made to the Washburn shell-list, but that the 
species (and individuals) observed during the day were very few in 
number, including only Limax agrestris and L. arborum, Arion ater, 
A. hortensis, Helix rufescens, Limnsea peregra, Ancylus fluviatilis, a 
Zonites, and Cochlicopa lubrica, all from Blubberhouses except the 
H. rufescens, which was from the lower part of the valley. For the 
Entomological Section, its president, Mr. Geo. T. Porritt, F.L.S., of 
Haddersfield, who had been obliged to leave before the general meeting, 
left a report to the effect that the weather had considerably spoilt 
collecting, but that in any case the locality would probably have proved 
very unproductive. One party had worked Washburndale, but only very 
common species had been noticed, and those who went over Otley Chevin 
had found the ground equally unproductive. Some species, usually 
common on such ground, were quite absent. The only noteworthy 
species was Penthina sauciana, which he had found rather common on 
the bilberry hills at Otley Chevin. He also noticed the following, 
hitherto unrecorded for the district : — Metrocampa margaritata, Larentia 
pectinitaria, Cidaria immanata, Sciaphila virgaureana, and Ablabia 
pratana, common. —A vote of thanks to the chairman concluded the 
meeting.— W. D. E>., W. E. C. 



WM. WILSO>^'S TOURS IN SCOTLAND AND IRELAND. 
1827-1830. 



By Jas. Cash. 

Bead before the Manchester Cr^ptoc/amic Society, April lC)th, ISSZ.J 



THE HIGHLANDS : 1827. 
My communication this evening must necessarily be discursive. If I 
trespass, as I may has^e to do, upon ground not strictly cryptogamic, 
I shall ask you to forgive me for the sake of the individual who is the 
subject of the sketch. This attempt to follow Mr. Wilson in his early 
wanderings, in Scotland and Ireland, must be regarded rather as a 
reminiscence than an historical record. The materials at my command 
are unfortunately meagre. The memoranda left by Mr. Wilson of his 
Scotch and Irish trips — 1827-1830 — are not sufficiently copious to 
enable anyone to construct a complete and connected account of all 
that he did ; nevertheless, the Journal he made at the time, and the 
correspondence which I have been permitted to inspect, form together 
a record sufficiently entertaining, in my judgment, to be worth 
preservation. 

Mr. Wilson's first trip to Scotland was in the year 1827, and it was 
made at the instigation of Dr. (afterwards Sir William) Hooker — then 
Professor of Botany in the University of Glasgow — who saw in his 
well-directed enthusiasm the foundation of a great botanical reputa- 
tion. But for the encouragement he received from Dr. Hooker, Mr. 
Wilson certainly would never have continued his studies with the 
ardour and success that he did. 

Getting to Glasgow was not so easy in those days as it is now, when 
we can leave Manchester at midnight, breakfast in Glasgow, and be 
botanising at Killin before noon. Before railways shortened the 
distance between us and the Highlands there were Lancashire 
botanists courageous enough to do the journey on foot. Mr. Wilson, 
however, was under no such necessity. On Saturday, the 16th June, 
1827, he took a passage on board the steam-packet " William 
Huskisson " (which sailed from Liverpool about four in the after- 
noon), and landed at Greenock at half -past nine on the following 
(Sunday) evening. On the Monday he continued his journey, by 
boat, and reached Glasgow the same afternoon. After spending a day 
with Professor Hooker, he joined an excursion party, which the 
Professor had arranged, to Breadalbane, travelling by way of Dum_ 
N.S., Vol. ix. Oct. 1883. 



42 



The Naturalist. 



barton to the head of Loch Lomond, thence through Glen Falloch and 
Glen Dochart to Killin. The party put up at the Lochay Bridge 
Hotel — then, as now, a rendezvous for botanists. On the Thursday 
they visited the Falls of Lochay ; next day they ascended Craig 
Cailleach ; and on the Saturday they attacked Ben Lawers. There 
was a Mr. Brown of the party, but whether Mr. Robert Brown, of 
whom Hooker once wrote that he was the greatest botanist of this 
or any age," is uncertain. At the week-end, Dr. Hooker and several 
of his friends left Killin, but Mr. Wilson and Mr. Brown remained. 
Monday was occupied by the latter in visiting Ben Lawers, whilst Mr. 
Wilson botanised near Killin. He records the finding of TrieMalis 
europoia^ but does not specify the exact locality, though it was most 
probably in Finlarig Park, where the plant was gathered by Hooker 
himself on a subsequent visit. 

Mr. Wilson had come prepared to make a long stay at Killin ; he 
took lodgings in the village for two months. During that period he 
visited Ben Lawers several times. He also ascended Mael Ghyrdie 
and other mountains, and made an exploration generally of the 
district. His attention seems to have been directed chiefly to 
flowering plants, for, in the few memoranda which he has left of this 
trip, I find but two mosses — Teiraplodon mnioides and Oligotrichum 
hercynicum — mentioned. On Craig Cailleach he gathered Juncm 
castaneus^ and studied the difference between Juncus higlumis and 
J\ trig turn is— Q'dti&iy in g himself that they were abundantly distinct." 

Mr. Wilson's stay at Killin extended until the end of August. His 
solitude was broken by a visit which he received from two German 
gentlemen, Messrs. Von Ovenhuysen and Von Decken, who were 
devoted to the study of mineralogy, and one of them also to botany, 
and who brought with them a note of introduction from Prof. Hooker. 

On the IGth of August Mr. Wilson records his finding of Sedim 
villosum, Gentiana nivalis, and other rarities, upon Ben Lawers. On 
the 21st of that month, on Mael Ghyrdie, he gathered Juncus trifidus 
and /. castaneus. Quitting Killin on the 29th, he walked through 
Glen Ogle, and by way of Loch Earn Head and Loch Lubnaig, to 
Callander, where he took coach to Stirling, en route for Glasgow. I 
ought to mention that, before leaving Scotland, Mr. Wilson paid 
a visit to Campsie, no doubt to see if he could find the famous 
TFelssia tenuirostris,^^ which had been such a bone of contention between 
Hooker and Taylor, but apparently without success. He mentions, 
however, the finding of LysimacJiia thyrsifiora in two localities. 

The results of his sojourn in the Highlands on this occasion were. 



Cash : Wilson's Tours in Scotland and Ireland. 48 



some time afterwards, embodied by Mr. Wilson in a paper which 
ippeared in Hooker's Botanical Miscellany. 

After spending a week in Glasgow with Professor Hooker, Mr. 
Wilson sailed for Liverpool via Greenock, on the 7th September. 

That Mr. Wilson's visit to Prof. Hooker was an agreeable one is 
proved by a letter which I find dated Mar. 7th, 1828. The Professor 
wrote to his friend — I have not had the pleasure of hearing from you 
since you left Glasgow ; nevertheless I can assure you you have often 
been in my mind, and the short visit you paid us has frequently been 
mentioned in my family as one we should be very glad to have 
repeated. I am reminded of you, too, not unfrequently when I come 
to some of the beautiful specimens of plants from the Highlands, with 
which you have supplied my herbarium." Then, after anxiously 
enquiring after Mr. Wilson's health and present pursuits, and whether 
he has collected any mosses or other cryptogamia during the winter, 
the writer adds : — Have you carefully gone over your alpine collec- 
tions made last year ? And have you any observations to offer upon 
any rare or doubtful species ] I think you could give me a list of 
previously unknown habitats for some of the scarce alpine plants, 
which will be useful in the second edition of my Flo7'a Scotica, on 
which I must soon be engaged. * * * * Your success in the 
Highlands last year was not such^ I fear, in your estimation as to 
induce you to make an excursion of a similar kind this year ; but, 
should you feel disposed, we shall be very glad to see you at our 
house ; and if you wish to gather Astragalus campestris^ Soiiclim 
coeruleus, Gar ex rarijiora, and Saxifraga rivularis, on the mountains of 
Clova, though I cannot go there myself, you will find Drummond an 
admirable guide." 

In a subsequent letter (June 22) Dr. Hooker mentions the fact of 
his having abandoned the idea of bringing out a second edition of the 
Flora Scotica, and his determination to publish, instead, the British 
Flora, ^' I would," he says, ^' never have thought of such a thing 
whilst Sir James Smith was living, but now I feel myself fully at 
liberty to do so ; and my general plan will be the same as that of my 
Flora Scotica. Whatever observation you make, I wish (if you 
approve of the way in which I have printed your Breadalbane notes) 
you would also let me print in your name in the future numbers of 
this journal, for not only will you thereby be correcting important 
existing botanical errors, but you will promote a spirit of inquiry in 
this walk of science, and I shall profit by your remarks in my future 
systematic works." 



44 



The Naturalist. 



SCOTLAND AND IRELAND : 1829-30. 
An invitation to Mr. Wilson from Prof. Hooker resulted in his 
paying a second visit to Glasgow and the Highlands in the summer of 
1829, prior to his making an extended trip through the south of 
Ireland. There was no want of cordiality in the invitation. Mr. 
Wilson's health had been for a long time delicate, and Professor 
Hooker desired that he should undertake the journey, hoping that he 
would profit by it physically. I still hope,"' he wrote (Jan. 2()th, 
1829) ^> that in the summer your health and your inclination will 
allow you to come northwards. I wish you to know more of Mr. 
Arnott, and something of Dr. Wallich, and I desire to have you with 
us again in the Highlands.'' Mr. Wilson was preparing critical notes 
for the first volume of Dr. Hooker's forthcoming British Flora, Take 
ample time," Dr. Hooker wrote (Feb. 2, 1829) ^' in selecting notes 
and specimens of plants for me ; and I know well, from some little 
experience, how valuable they will be to me and the public. * * Keep 
your mind and your time occupied in the way you do now, and be 
assured that the result will be advantageous both to your health and to 
science." Acknowledging a parcel of plants, accompanied with notes, 
Professor Hooker wrote : The plants and the notes upon them are 
exactly what I could wish them to be, and such as I could receive 
from no one else. But I fear you have devoted your attention too 
zealously to this subject. In regard both to the work on mosses, and 
the British Flora^ it will be yet twelve months before they are pub- 
lished, and it is both to my interest and to that of the public to go to 
press as late as possible. There is, therefore, abundance of time for 
any observations that occur to you, and I had much rather that you 
"would relax from your ardent devotion to the descriptive department 
of botany, and spend your time in the country, or where you will be 
more freed from mental occupation. By this means you will, I trust, 
sufficiently recover your health to enable you to undertake a vogage 
from Liverpool to Glasgow, and then go into the Highlands with me 
and some brother botanists. There, too, we may gather plants, but, 
then, you must do as I do — you must consider this excursion as 
undertaken for the purpose of pleasure, and not of hard study. We 
will then, too, talk about plants, without letting them occupy too 
much of our attention. * * * Now, my dear friend, let me assure 
you that you will render me the greatest service by withdrawing for a 
time from all mental occupation, and thus fitting yourself for a visit to 
the North, which you know, two years ago, was beneficial to your 
health. I am expecting Mr. Hensiov*^, of Cambridge, will join our 



Cash : Wilson's Tours in Scotland and Ireland. 45 

party ; so will Mr. Arnott and some others, whom you will like to 
see, but who, like myself, reckon upon the excursion as a relief from 
our studies at home, and as a relaxation that will the better fit us for 
them afterwards. I calculate on setting oif on the 23rd of June. 
Come as much sooner as may be convenient to you, and you will find 
a bed and a hearty welcome prepared for you. * * All here desire 
to be most kindly remembered to you." 

Mr. Wilson left home on the 19th of June, and did not return to 
Warrington until the 31st of March following — the intervening period 
being spent in Scotland, Ireland, and Wales in the health-inspiring 
pursuit to which he had devoted himself. From his journal of the 
voyage north we learn that on the 19th of June he sailed from Liver- 
pool to Glasgow (paying cabin fare, 25s.), and reached his destination 
on the evening of the following day. On the 23rd of June he set out 
with Dr. Hooker and party for Killin, travelling via Dumbarton and 
Loch Lomond. Next day they botanised upon Craig Cailleach, and 
on the 25th upon Ben Lawers. Mr. Wilson did not leave Killin until 
July 4th ; on that day he travelled via Stirling to Glasgow, and spent 
a week in the society of Prof. Hooker and other naturalists, one of 
whom was Dr. Walker-Arnott, who during Mr. Wilson's stay returned 
from a botanical tour in Skye, bringing with him specimens of 
Eriocaulon, 

On the 15th of July Mr. Wilson quitted Glasgow for Dublin, 
reaching the Irish capital on the following evening. I went," he 
says, ^' to a filthy tavern, which I soon quitted." Six days later he 
sailed for Cork. Very soon after his arrival there we find him at work, 
and his first search — happily successful — was for Hooke/ ia loete-virens. 
The entry in his journal under date Thursday, 23rd July, is as 
follows : — Went to Dunscombe's Wood for Hookma loete-inrem^ 
which I at length found in a shady wet part of the rivulet, immediately 
above the watering place, overgrown with brambles," 

Here I pause for a moment to say something about this beautiful 
moss ; and I am glad to have the opportunity which this entry afi'ords 
me — even if there were no other evidence on the point — of correcting 
an error into which the editor of Professor Harvey's Memoir has, no 
doubt, unwittingly fallen. The editor says [Mem. p. 20,] that in the 
summer of 1831, Harvey, visiting Killarney, with his friend Mr. 
Fennell, found flookeria loete-mrens, a moss heretofore unnoticed as 
an Irish plant," that by means of this discovery he introduced himself 
to Sir William, then Dr. Hooker, curator of the Botanic Gardens at 
Glasgow ; and that thus began an acquaintance which quickly ripened 
into a warm and lasting friendship. 



The Naturalist. 



The species was first observed by Dr. James Drummorid in this very 
place to which Mr. Wilson had received directions, namely Dunscombe's 
Wood, in the year 1816. The first description of the moss, accompanied 
by a figure, appeared in Hooker and Taylor's Miiscologla Britannica. 
Writing of it in 1830, Prof. Hooker says : only one station is known 
for this moss, namely in the south of Ireland, in a wood in the vicinity 
of Cork, where it grew near a spring, whose temperature is consider- 
ably higher than that of the surrounding atmosphere." The figure in 
English botany was from specimens gathered by Mr. Wilson at the 
time of which we write, i.e, 1829. Harvey was, however, the first to 
detect the moss at Killarney— rather, v/e may imagine, to V/ilson's 
chagrin, for, had he not, but two years before, gone over the very spot 
where it grew % 

Harvey, who was a young and enthusiastic botanist, made Hookeria 
Icete-virem a medium of introduction to Prof. Hooker, as appears by 
the following letter, which I quote from his memoir. He was a 
Quaker, and that will account for the quaintness of the phraseology : — 
" Respected Friend : Having discovered two new habitats for the 
beautiful Hookeria IcBte-virens which I am anxious to have inserted in 
the forthcoming volume of the Briti'sJi Flora, I take the liberty of en- 
closing specimens, trusting to thy goodness to excuse this want of a 
personal introduction. As the plant occurs in plenty in one of the 
situations attached, I think it highly probable it may be found in many 
other places, and very extraordinary it should be overlooked by J. T. 
Mackay, as it is found within three or four yards of his habitat for 
TricJiomanes, I have had no opportunity of comparing Cork specimens, 
but my plants do not appear of a deeper or brighter green than E. 
lucms. The fruit, unfortunately, was old, many of the capsules had 
fallen, and many of the opercula ; but it appeared from the number of 
broken foot-stalks to have been in plenty. Should thou think this 
letter worth replying to, thou wilt address me as under, and permit me 
(again apologising for taking the liberty to address thee) to subscribe 
myself very respectfully thine — W. Henry Harvey, Summerville, 
Limerick, 7 mo. 13, 1831." 

Thus it is clear Harvey did not himself claim priority in the dis- 
covery of Hookeria loete-virens. It is not a little singular that some 
years later he found the moss growing in the greatest luxuriance in the 
vicinity of Cape Town, South Africa. It is apparently a sub-tropical 
species, and Schimper goes so far as to say that it is alien to the 
European flora. 

On the 28th of July Mr. Wilson prepared for a journey to Killarney. 



Cash : Wilson's Tours in Scotland and Ireland. 47 

Riding to Macroom, he walked thence 13 miles to Millstreet, carrying 
a heavy burden. Next day he had a still naore fatiguing walk to 
Killarney — 21 miles. He was able on the 3Uth to begin botanising, 
and he records- in his journal of that date, observing, on the Kenmare 
road, Arbutus unedo. He gathered Rhjyicospora fiisca^ Pinguicula 
lusitanica, and RjjmenopJiyllum Tunbrldgense, Reaching Turk Cascade, 
he found barren specimens of the rare Trichomanes radicam ; and on 
the 31st he gathered this fern in a fertile condition. His time appears 
to have been occupied for some days in gathering and drying flowering 
plants, the monotony of the occupation being relieved by a visit from 
Dr. Dickson, a zealous botanical student," who came with a letter of 
introduction to him from Prof. Hooker. 

About this time, Mr. Wilson wrote an account of his doings to 
Prof. Hooker, who replied as follows: — On my return last evening 
from a visit to my friend Mr. Lyell, at Kinnordy * * I had the 
great pleasure to find your letter from Killarney. To use a Scotch 
expression, I was tvearying to hear from you ; but I am concerned at 
your not having been more successful. I fear that the whole of Great 
Britain is too uniform in its vegetable productions for any one portion 
to yield you^ advanced as you are in the botany of this country, any 
very abundant harvest. You are perhaps too late for phoenogamous 
plants, and the rains have certainly been against you ; but I am still 
of opinion that the south of Ireland will afford a more abundant 
harvest than any other part of the British Islands for cryptogamia. 
Indeed you seem to have already gathered many of these — such perhaps 
as are already known. But that cannot be a bad country which has 
given you a new Uypmim and a new Ilymenophyllum. I quite long to 
see these two novelties. If you like to draw up a few notes respecting 
them, I will send them in your name to English Botany, where 
they will be a thousand times more interesting than the bad species of 
wiUows and roses there represented. Ilooheria loete-virens (not yet 
figured in English Botany,) Trichomanes brevisetum (T. radicans) 
Eriocaidon, the Plnguiculce, not a few Jungermanni(2 rariores, &c., &c , 
must not stand for nothing." 

On the Gth of August Mr. Wilson transferred his quarters to the 
house of a Mr. Casey, at Kenmare. Next day he walked to Drum- 
ouchty lake, south of the town, and had some excellent botanising. 
He found, amongst other things, Pinguicula grandijiora, and was en- 
gaged until three in the afternoon gathering Eriocaulon. Eeturning 
homeward he observed Sium verticillatum and a variety of Mentha 
hirsuta. 



48 



The Na^turalist. 



August 8th was wholly occupied by Mr. Wilson with drying and 
examining the plants he had gathered. A few days later he gathered 
more of the rare Pinguicula^ and he also records the finding of speci- 
mens with fruit of Tortiila tortuom. One or two quaint entries which 
appear in his journal about this time are amusing. For instance, 
under date of Sept. 6th, he wrote : Up late, feverish. Very fine, 
sunny day. Caught and executed a few fleas." 

The first mention I find of Daltonia splachuQides is on the 9th of 
September, Mr. Wilson having come upon that rare moss during a visit 
to Cromagloun. On the 10th, he writes : " Walked to Turk mountain 
and ascended a woody glen. Found Daltonia splachnoides with ripe 
capsules." He climbed that day to the summit of Turk, and returned 
to his lodgings at night much fatigued. Amongst his gatherings 
during the journey was Pimpinella magna^ which was found growing in 
Muckross woods. 

Another visit was made to those woods on the 12th of September. 
Mr. Wilson then found Jmigermannia Mackayii in fruit, Zygodon 
conoideus^ Z. viridissirnus, Hyprmm tenellum^ &c. Four days later he 
gathered more of Daltonia splachnoides^ and found Jungermannia calyp- 
trifolia. At Cromagloun, on the 19th, he came upon a large patch of 
Daltonia — most of it ripe ; also a " large quantity " of Trichomafies 
radicans. 

Mr. Wilson seems to have lost no time in communicating to Prof. 
Hooker his finding of Daltonia splachnoides and other good things. 
He received a letter from the Professor, dated October 18th, 1829, in 
which the writer said : '*1 had great pleasure in receiving your Jetter 
yesterday, and I can no longer delay replying to it and congratulating 
you, as I do most cordially, on your success in discovering a new and 
so good a habitat for Daltonia splachnoides. If there was one moss 
more than any other that I wished should be found by you it was this 
very moss, for I think I may call it inter miiscos rarissimus. I wrote 
directly to inform Arnott of it, for, long as he has studied mosses, he 
has never been able to obtain the smallest morsel of this, and actually 
off'ered to an Edinburgh botanical student, who possessed a little 
specimen given him by Dr. Taylor, a guinea for it. The young man, 
though really no botanist, would not part with it. I told Mackay in 
my letter to him that if anyone could rediscover Daltonia splachnoides 
in Ireland it would be you. * * * You are assuredly adopting 
the only plan for becoming well acquainted with the cryptogamic plants 
of any particular district ; and I wish the same were more practised 
by those who seek phsenogamous plants — they examine countries too 
hastily." 



Cash : Wilson's Tours in Scotland and Ireland. 49 

In a former letter Prof. Hooker had asked Mr. Wilson to pay 
attention to the rubi and willows of the south of Ireland, and this Mr. 
Wilson seems to have done, for the Professor now writes : " Mr. Borrer 
will be happy to see you ; he has most kindly undertaken to describe 
the roses, rubi, and willows for my British Flora. Among your roses 
he finds a new one, which has gratified him much.'' 

During the rem.ainder of Mr. Wilson's stay in Ireland (from the 
beginning of October to the end of January) I do not find any record 
in his Journal of new discoveries. It is, however, certain that within 
this period he found in the district where he was then botanizing, the 
moss which, first named by Wilson Glyiphocarpa cernua in Hooker's 
Journal of Botany ^ was afterwards re-named by Bruch and Schimper 
after the discoverer, Bartramidula Wilsoni, He made a gathering of 
Daltonia splachnoides at Turk mountain on the 4th October— the fruit 
being then fully ripe — and also a gathering of two much commoner 
mosses, JELypnum brevirostre and H, loreum. On the 15th of that 
month he records the finding of Daltonia splachnoides in abundance, 
and he took the opportunity of laying in a good supply," At that 
time he observed Arbutus unedo in flower. On the 7th November, 
Hypnum blandum ( H, illeceb^nim) was gathered near Dunkerron, and 
in the neighbourhood of Kenmare. 

(To he continued.) 



L 0 TJ I kS a G a S S I Z . 
By Rev. S. Fletcher Williams. 
( Concluded.) 

A little incident of Agassiz's life is told, which I merely mention 
because it gives a key to his character. Once, in the small cabinet of 
a college, which he was examining with a good deal of interest, and where 
he was just as modest as if all the scientific treasures of the earth were 
before his eyes, a singularly-formed turtle-shell from the Mississipi was 
shown him, v/ith the request that he would nam_e the species to which 
it belonged. Taking it into his hand, he said, with all the candour 
of an unspoiled child, ^' I don't know this." The confession was 
surprising, as the study of turtles was known to be a favourite branch 
of investigation with him, and here he was profoundly learned. In a 
few minutes, however, he quietly remarked — '*0h I I see— it is a 
malformation," which it really was, though it required vast knowledge 
of this sort of creatures to detect the fact. We can all imagine how 
the common-place professor, desirous of keeping up a name for know- 
ledge, would have managed to conceal his ignorance. 



50 



The Naturalist. 



One mark of Agassiz's greatness was in his freedom from all vain 
ostentation, all pretence of learning, to secure attention to himself. 
The cause of truth was infinitely dear to him ; and he saw such 
boundless wealth in the storehouses of the universe that his mind 
always kept the attitude of a humble learner and a patient inquirer of 
nature's manifold and majestic meanings. It was the candour, 
modesty, simplicity, and perennial freshness of spirit in Connection 
with his massive intellect, which enabled him to pursue with such 
eagerness and success the studies that have rendered his name 
immortal. The frame of mind in which he lived was suited to the 
happiest prosecution of his chosen labours, to the search for and the 
recognition of the wondrous truths of nature. It was enough for him 
to find what the record of creation said, and in the presence of the 
august revelation he was lowly and docile as a child. 

And this leads me to mention one more feature of his character, 
which, blended with the others, expressed his nobleness, — and that is, 
his reverent spirit. He realised deeply the grandeur and the uses of 
life. All that related to man's interests and place upon the earth was 
sacred to him. In his investigations of this mysterious frame of 
things he felt that he was searching out the thoughts of God. There 
was constantly before him what (to him) was evidence, drawn from 
purely scientific sources, of the Almighty's creative wisdom ; and I 
could quote to you paragragh upon paragraph from all his works in 
which he adduces testimony wherein he sees the manifestation of a 
mind as powerful as it is prolific, the acts of an intelligence as 
sublime as it is provident, the marks of goodness as infinite as wise, 
the palpable demonstration of the existence of an author of all things, 
ruler of the universe. Indeed it is but truth to say that the whole of 
his works might be called, with justice, treatises upon the highest 
forms of evidence given by zoology to the doctrine that God, the 
Creator, is a mind, a thinking and self-conscious Intelligence. This 
doctrine is, in Agassiz's view, the only foundation upon which an 
intelligent study of zoology can be grounded. With him the aim of 
science is something more than the grouping of facts under a general 
formula. This may be obtained by empiricism, in some cases more 
successfully than by science. The aim of science is to detect the 
thoughts of the Creative Mind. To the school of Positive Philosophy 
the knowledge of the processes or laws of nature is the only subject 
worthy of investigation, and the school thinks it very unscientific to 
assume that thinking is not a function of the brain, and that there is 
an essential difference, an impassable gulf, between inorganic matter 



Williams : Louis Aoassiz, 



51 



and living thinking beings. But,'* says Agassiz, ^' I shall not be 
prevented by any such pretensions of a false philosophy from 
expressing my conviction that, as long as it cannot be shown that 
matter or physical forces do actually reason, I shall consider any 
manifestation of thought as evidence of the existence of a thinking 
being as the author of such thought, and shall look upon an intelligent 
and intelligible connection between the facts of nature as distinct proof 
of the existence of a thinking God, as certainly as man exhibits the 
power of thinking when he recognises their natural relations." ® Again 
and again, too, he maintains that classification is a philosophical study 
of the highest importance, since it is an attempt to understand the 
Infinite Wisdom. ^ His pervading principle is, that a natural system 
must have an actual existence in nature, but that it consists not simply 
in actual differences of physical manifestation, but in the intangible 
differences of plan or conception in the Creative Mind.^^ He main- 
tained for Natural History that it shows the whole creation is the 
expression of thought, and not the product of physical agents ; and that, 
regarded in that light, it gives scientific evidence of God's working in 
nature. 11 This is what he read in the disclosures of the sciences; 
and testimony such as his must have enormous weight. His 
daily thought was all vital with the consciousness of the Infinite 
Supreme. So he lived face to face with the glorious and solemn facts 
of a present Deity. Reading so constantly the records of the divine 
wisdom, and penetrated so deeply with a sense of life's object and 
possibilities, he bore about with him a spirit of reverential awe, — a 
recognition of God that was both an inspiration and a joy. In such 
a habit of life his heart could never grow old. 

The poetical tribute which Longfellow addressed to him on his 
fiftieth birthday so vividly pourtrays his beautiful career, that it will 
form a fitting conclusion to this paper : — 

^' It was fifty years ago^ 

In the pleasant month of May, 
In the beautiful Pays de Vaud 
A child in its cradle lay. 

8 See the First Chapter in the Essay on Classification in Natural History of the 
United States. 

9 See Second Chapter in Essay on Classification, Ibid. 

Agassiz also referred the phenomena both of the origin and the distribution 
of species of plants and animals directly to the Divine Will ; but his theory 
here, as Professor Gray observes, " may be said to be theistic to excess." 

1 1 See Tour to Lake Superior^ pp. 144, 146. 



52 



The Naturalist, 



And Nature, the old nurse, took 
The child upon her knee, 

Saying, Here is a story-book 
My Father has written for thee. 

* Come, wander with me,' she said^ 
^ Into regions yet untrod, 
And read what is still unread 
In the manuscripts of God, ' 

And he wandered away and awa^y 
With Nature, the dear old nurse, 

Who sang to him night and day 
The songs of the universe. 

And whenever the way seemed long. 
Or his heart began to fail, 

She would sing a more wonderful song, 
Or tell a more marvellous tale. 

So she keeps him still a child, 
And will not let him go, 

Though at tim-es his heart beats wild 
For the beautiful Pays de Yaud. 

Though at times he hears in his dreams 
The Ranz des Vaches of old, 

And the rush of the mountain streams 
From glaciers clear and cold ; 

And the mother at home says, ^ Hark I 
For his voice I listen and yearn ; 

It is growing late, and dark, 
And my boy does not return ! ' 

85, Everton-road, Liverpool. 



Birds near Halifax.™ In this district, during the past summer, most 
of the moorland and woodland birds have been very plentiful. The twite, 
ring'Ouzel, wheatear, skylark, and yellow-hammer have been numerous 
on the uplands and high moors ; plovers have also nested. The redstart, 
spotted flycatcher, white throat, lesser redpoll, sand martin, whinchat, 
meadow pipit, grey and yellow wagtails, have ail appeared fairly 
numerous in the most suitable localities. The song and missel thrush 
have been more common this summer than for several seasons. Starlings 
in flocks have also been abundant. The moorhen, common sandpiper, 
water ouzel, and landrail have all nested in the district. Willow wrens 
have been plentiful in the woods. The nightjar, partridge, kingfisiier, 
and swift have been observed in the locality. In addition to those men- 
tioned, all the common species which annually nest in the neighbourhood 
have bred very freely this summer, and young birds of most kinds are 
Humorous. —F, G. S. Rawson, Sept. 10th, 



Short Notes anp Queries. 



58 



Distribution of Tectura testudinalis in Yorkshire. — In the pages of 
The Naturalist of Jan., 1879, I published the occurrence of the above 
mollusc at Whitby, and laid claim to the honour of having discovered and 
published its mo^t southerly habitat. No sooner was this done than some 
Leeds conchologists drew my attention to a record on this very shell in 
the Supplement of Dr. Jefirey's " British Conchology," which I had 
overlooked. Since then I have had some correspondence with Dr. 
Jeffreys, and incidentally this shell was mentioned. To Yorkshire 
conchologists I am sure this paragraph of the doctor's letter will be 
interesting: Mr. Leckenby got his Yorkshire specimens of Tectura 
testudinalis from Staithes, together with Dogger Bank shells ; I believe 
they were dead." Now as quaint old Staithes — where circumnavigator 
Cook served his apprenticeship to a grocer — is a little fishing village ten 
miles N.W. of Whitby, my claim is sustained. As no conchologist will 
reckon flotsam and jetsam, even if from the Dogger Bank, as equal to the 
shells which are gathered alive on their feeding grounds, I laid no claim 
to a dead shell, which I found of this animal in Kobin Hood's Bay, six 
miles further south than Whitby. — Hy. Crowther, Beeston Hill, Leeds. 

Larentia ruficinctata &c., in Yorkshire. — Having seen, in the pro- 
gramme of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union's excursion on Sept. 1st, 
that Malham is supposed to be the only locality in Yorkshire for Larentia 
ruficinctata, it may be of interest to your readers to know that I have 
captured about Oughtershaw, Langstrothdale, in Craven, at an elevation 
of 1200 feet above the sea-level, at the sources of the Wharfe, several 
specimens of this insect, one at the beginning of August this year. I 
have also taken Chortohius Davus in this district, and Erehia Blandina at 
Buckden. — Trevor Basil Woodd, Oughtershaw Hall, Langstrothdale 
Chase, Skipton. 

[Mr. Woodd has very kindly sent me specimens of the above for 
inspection. The Erehia Blandina and Larentia ruficinctata are well- 
marked specimens of the ordinary types ; but the C. Davus are very 
curious. They are smaller than any Davus I have noticed before, and 
the markings are just about between the Thorne Waste specimens, 
which are all of the variety Rothliehii, and the Scotch form which is the 
ordinary type of the species. They aj:e, indeed, just what one would 
expect a hybrid between C. Davus and G. Pamphilus would be ; and 
as the large South European variety Lyllus, Esp., of C. Pamphilus 
expands from 1 to li inches, and has marginal eyes on the underside of 
the hind wings, it is just possible these specimens may be referable to it. 
A long series of Oughtershaw specimens must decide that. — G. T. P.] 

iScoparia conspicualis and Dicrorampha herbosana at Grassington. — I 
took a Scoparia last June in Grass High Wood, Grassington, which I did 
not recognize, and have had it in the corner of one of my store boxes 
until last week, when I sent it to Mr. C. G. Barrett, along with a few 
local Tortrices. He has, however, returned it me, named S. conspicualis, 



54 



The Naturalist. 



which is a good addition to the lepidopterous fauna of Upper Wharfedale, 
and happily confirms Mr. Porritt's surmise (see Nat. JST.S. . viii., p. 27) 
that he had seen it at the Union's excursion to Grassington in 1882. 
Another species amongst others taken there by my brother may be 
worth recording, viz., D. herbosana. — E. P. P. Butterfield, Wilsden, 
Bingley, Sept., 1883. 

[The interest of the capture of >S. conspicualis at Grassington is further 
enhanced by the fact that the specimen was taken in June, as it points 
strongly to there being two broods during the year of this comparatively 
recent addition to the British list. Previously the species had only been 
recorded as occurring in August. — G. T. P.] 

Nephrodiu7n cristatum. — A Correction. — Dr. F. Arnold Lees has 
kindly called my attention to an erroneous statement in my List of York 
Ferns {Naturalist j July, 1883, pp. 178 and 181), with regard to the first 
finding of this fern at Askham Bog. Mr. West and I certainly discovered 
it in September, 1875, without having the least idea that it had been 
previously found there : but as Dr. Lees has referred me to more than 
one previous record of it, I hasten to correct the error. He says : In 
Watson's ' Topographical Botany ' (1873-4) it stands recorded for the 
south-west division of Yorkshire, with a query for the mid-west division 
also. Askham Bog comes within the latter area. Mr. John Hardy, now 
of Manchester (formerly of Sheffield), first added it to the Yorkshire 
flora, having got it on the border of Thorne Waste. In 1872 I confirmed 
that ^'find " by gathering it there myself in small quantity in a boggy, 
bushy place. In 1873 I gave the S.W. division of Yorks. to Mr. Watson 
for it. A year, or perhaps two, later (certainly before 1875), when I 
lived at Leeds, Mr. Henry Ibbotson told me it grew on the bog at 
Askham. He had, I understood, found it himself. It occurs in a MS 
list of his which I hold, furnished to me when I was preparing my work 
on ' West Yorkshire ' (including the Ainsty). I went to the bog and 
gathered a frond or two myself ; as you say, it is very scarce, and 
peculiar in habit of pinna-insertion, &c. To Mr. Ibbotson, who is a good 
botanist, and discovered it independently of you, belongs the credit of 
leading me to gather it and publish it in 1875 for Askham Bog, in ' West 
Yorkshire ' (p. 324-5)." Of course I have no further wish to claim to 
have first discovered this fern in Yorkshire, and would have corrected 
the error earlier had not temporary absence from England prevented me. 
Probably I should not have overlooked these previous records had I not 
been for some years separated from Yorkshire and its botanists. — Robt. 
Miller Christy, Canada, Aug. 25th, 1883. 

A List of Flowering Plants and Ferns growing in Lincolnshire 
(north and south divisions), recorded from those Vice-counties in the 
Bot. Kecord Club Reports, for 1875 to 1882, which are omitted from those 
Yice-counties in the 2nd edition of Topographical Botany," by Rev. 
W. Fowler, M.A. 



Short Notes and Queries. 



55 



Lincoln North, 54. 

1. Clematis Yitalba, f (54), 1878 Rep., p. 8 

155. Silene anglica, 1881-2 Rep., p. 185 

247. Rhamnus frangula, 1877 Re., p.p. 211 and 234 

291. Ornithopus perpusillus, 1876 Rep., 160 

384. Callitriche platycarpa, 1876 Rep., p. 162 

592. Arctium intermedium, 1881-2 Rep., p. 192 

818. Teucrium scorodonia, 1875 Rep., p. 107 
1040. Epipactis palustris, 1881-82 Rep., p. 196 
1213. Carex elongata, 1881-82 Rep., p. 198 

1218. Carex eu-arenaria (as occurring inland as well as on the coast), 

1879 Rep., p. 61 
1232. Carex acuta, 1880 Rep., p. 138 
1303. Aira caryophyllea, 1875 Rep., p. 112 
1310. Avena pubescens, 1880 Rep., p. 139 
1322. Glyceria plicata, 1880 Rep., p. 139 
1384. Polystichum angulare, 1880 Rep., p. 139 
1410. Botrychium lunaria, 1875 Rep., p. 113 
Lincoln South, 53. 

135. Yiola Reichenbachiana, 1879 Rep., p. 52 

257. Anthyllis vulneraria, 1879 Rep., p. 54 

345. Rosa tomentosa, 1881-82 Rep., p. 188 

528. AsperuLa cynanchica, 1879 Rep., p. 57 

652. Cineraria campestris, 1877 Rep., p. 285 

905. Piantago Coronopus, 1877 Rep., p. 220 

950. Rumex palustris, 1881-2 Rep., p. 227 
1056. Habenaria viridis, 1880 Rep., p. 137 
1234. Carex eu-flava, 1880 Rep. p. 138 
1420. Equisetum maximum, 1880 Rep., p. 139 

The following species recorded in the reports are also omitted, but 
because considered nowhere indigenous in Britain, and as such, not 
traced out comitally at all in the Topograpical Botany." 
273. Tripolium hybridum (par. 53), 1877 Rep., p. 211 
650. Senecio saracenicus (par. 53), 1880 Rep., p. 136 
653. Doronicum Pardalianches (par. 54), 1877 Rep., p. 218 
Nepeta Cataria. — This plant is queried an escape," in Toj). Bot, 
edition 1, and the query is not erased in edition 2, although in the Bot. 
Rec. Club Reports for 1877, p. 241, and elsewhere, it is proved to occur 
abundantly, and under no circumstances entitling it to be suspected. 

REYIEW. — The Natural History of Hastings and St. Leonards and 
the Vicinity," First Supplement, 1883, Is. — We have been very pleased 
to receive from the Rev. E. N. Bloomfield, a copy of the first supplement 
to the fauna and flora of the Hastings district, published in 1878, by the 
Hastings and St. Leonards Philolsophical Society. No better proof of the 
great usefulness and energy of the Sussex naturalists is required than 



56 



The Naturalist. 



this supplement, as in the five years that haye elapsed since 1878, no less 
than 1500 species in the various orders have been added as new to the 
district investigated. More than half of the whole list is devoted to the 
various orders, comprising the insecta ; then follow the birds ; additions 
to the various orders of plants, including hepaticae, lichens, fungi, fresh- 
water algye, &c. An addition to the former little work, is an entirely 
new list of the coleoptera, and the insects altogether number the grand 
total of 3513, made up as follows : — 



Coleoptera ... 

Lepidoptera... 

Hymenoptera : — 
Terebrantia 
Ichneumonidse 
Fossores, &c. .. 
Cynipidae 
Anthophila, &c. 

Hemiptera : — 
Heteroptera 
H omoptera 

Diptera 

Neuroptera ... 

Trichoptera . . . 

Other insects 



87 
212 
77 
13 
123 

238 
102 



1271 
1012 



512 



341 

285 
48 
23 
21 

3513 



Special care has been taken to submit doubtful species for determination 
to the leading specialists in the various groups, thus thoroughly avoiding 
the too common fault of incorrect nomenclature by incompetent compilers, 
and which invariably renders such lists, to a great extent, useless for 
scientific purposes. We congratulate the Society most heartily on its 
work. 

OBITUARY. — Henry Harpur Crewe. — We deeply regret to have to 
announce the death of the Rev, H. Harpur Crewe, M.A., which event 
took place on September 7th, at the Rectory at Drayton Beauchamp, 
Tring, at the comparatively early age of 54. Mr. Crewe's reputation as a 
lepidopterist will be as lasting as it was extensive, for his knowledge of 
the British species of the large genus Eupithecia was unrivalled in Britain 
or elsewhere. For many years this genus was his favourite and especial 
study, and the minutest details in the careful descriptions of the larvse 
of almost every species have been read with delight by all who take 
interest in the group. I believe too, that almost the last (perhaps the 
last) specimens of Noctua suhrosea taken in Britain were captured by Mr. 
Crewe. In a letter I have from him, dated from Drayton Beauchamp 
Rectory, January 27th, 1872, he writes : ^^Do you know of anyone who 



Reports of Societies. 



57 



has taken N. suhrosea of late years ? In 1852, just after I left college, I 
took a number of wasted specimens at sugar about seventeen miles from 
here, by the side of a very old forest pond which has since been drained 
and cultivated. Tt may exist there still. I have never visited the 
locality since." For the last nine years or so, Mr. Crewe had not done 
much active collecting, but was still always ready and pleased to assist 
others in the science he loved so well ; and many, including myself, have 
in him lost an old and valued friend. — G.T.P. 



^eyorl^ of Soridus. 

Bradford Natur-alists' Society. — Meeting Sept. 18th, Mr. J. W. 
Carter, president, in the chair. — Mr. Bennett gave an account of a ramble 
in Lincolnshire, and exhibited a specimen of the fungus Folyporus 
squamosus. Mr. Soppitt described a visit to Ingleton, and showed 
Piiccinea Andersoni and P. dinopodi, found in Helks Wood. He also 
reported having seen Gentiana amavella in flower. Mr. W. D. Roebuck, 
of Leeds, gave a very interesting lecture on Slugs," illustrated by a 
collection of living specimens sent to him for the occasion by Mr. Ash- 
ford, of Christchurch. Mr. B. Spencer exhibited specimens of Inula 
dysenterica, Melilotus officinalis, and Achillea ptarmica (flora plena). Mr. 
Andrews, Veronica anagallis, Aconitnm Napellus and Malva sylvestris, — 
John Eastwood, Hon. Sec. 

HuDDERSFiELD Naturalists' Society. — Meeting September 10th, Mr. 
Clarke, v. p., in the chair. — Mr. Clarke exhibited a number of plants, 
including Polygonum avioulare, var. microspermiim, new to the district. 
The chairman called attention to the show of wild flowers which took 
place at the Exhibition on the 27th August. 313 species had been laid 
upon the tables, all with cards giving their scientific and common names, 
and other particulars. The number might have reached 400 if a sufficient 
number of competent persons had been there to arrange them. Several 
ladies contributed handsome bouquets of wild flowers. Mr. S. L. Mosley 
exhibited a living scorpion (probably vcejovis sp.) taken from logwood in 
the town. Vol I. of The Geological Survey of England and Wales" 
was added to the library. — S. L. M. 

Hull Naturalists' Society. — Last Bank Holiday a few members of 
the society went for a trip to Spurn Point. Nothing need be said of the 
ride to Withernsea, nor of the drive to Easington, nor of the walk from 
the latter place to Kilnsea, where the work of the day commenced, except 
to observe that right opposite this village there is what may be called a 
sea of mud, some 15,000 acres in extent. Why is this not reclaimed ? 
Fancy 15 farms of 1000 acres each, or, if divided still more, it would form 
a small colony. A good view of the moon-shaped ridge forming the 
Point, with the lighthouses in the distance, may be obtained from this 



58 



The Naturalist. 



place. Going a little way to the left, we are soon on the narrow 
peninsula. One of the first plants observed was the common ragwort 
{Senecio Jacohcea), almost every plant of which was covered with the 
beautiful caterpillars of the cinnabar moth (Euchelia Jacohce). The 
flora is not an extensive one, but very pronounced in type, being almost 
exclusively marine, and the few inland plants that occur are so eaten by 
the rabbits as to be past identifying. Here, almost side by side, may be 
seen Salicornea herhacea, Suceda maritima, and Salsola kali. There are 
few places where the mechanical influence of plants can be better 
observed than here, for were it not for the subterranean stems and roots 
of some half-dozen varieties of plants holding the sand together, there is 
little doubt but Spurn Point would have been washed away long ago, for 
the ridge at the top is in some places not more than 18 inches wide. The 
most valuable of these plants for this purpose are Elymus arenariuSj 
Tritimm junceum, Psamma arenaria, Carex arenaria, Hippophae rham- 
noides, Convolvulus Soldanella, and Eryngkmi maritimiim, which are here 
found abundantly. The following are selected from about 30 species 
of birds seen, a few of which were shot by an enthusiastic member 
of the party : — Little tern (Sterna minnta), a summer visitant which 
breeds at Spurn, arriving in May and leaving in September ; herring 
gull {Lams argentatvs) ; ringed plover (^gialis hiaticnla) ; common 
wheatear {Saxicola cenanthe), a summer visitant, and local ; common 
curlew {Numenius arqnata), resident and local, and so shy and suspicious 
as to have given rise to a saying in the Hebrides that ^' To kill seven 
curlews is enough for a lifetime " ; rock pipit (Anthns ohscurns) with nest 
and young. This latter bird is said to be plentiful, but always solitary, 
finding its food chiefly at and within high- water mark, where it runs with 
remarkable ease along the sand; its nest is made of bents or other plants 
growing near the sea. The choicest specimen seen or procured was the 
Manx shearwater {Pnffinus anglorum), which had flown against the light- 
house the previous night and been captured by the keeper. Twenty-three 
species of lepidoptera were observed, representing the following groups, 
viz : — Diurni, Nocturni, Geometrse, and Noctnse, the rarest species 
taken being the lyme grass moth (Tapinostola elymi). After a pleasant, 
though rather heavy walk, the extreme point was at last reached. Here 
we found a great quantity of Cakile maritima ; here also we refreshed 
the inner man, then refunded the point, visiting the lighthouse people. 
Two of us then made a very hasty inspection of the pre-historic kitchen 
midden on the coast just opposite the village, but found nothing except 
oyster shells. Evidently somebody keeps a very sharp look-out at this 
interesting locality. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting, Aug. 
27th, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) in the chair. — Mr. J. L. R. Dixon 
read a paper entitled ' ^ A comparison between the structure and function 
of the eyes in the various groups of insects," in which he described, with 



Repobts of Societies. 



59 



the aid of well executed diagrams, the various modifications which are 
found in the eyes of insects, and gave his reasons for believing that the 
function of the facets in the compound eyes is that of accommodation, 
their focal lengths varying. He believed the use of the simple eyes 
(ocelli) was merely for the purpose of the perception of light. The 
meeting terminated with the usual conversazione. 

Malton Field Naturalists' Excursion. — On Thursday, September 
13th, the Malton Field Naturalists' Society had a delightful excursion to 
Egton Bridge and Goathland Moors. Both ladies and gentlemen were in 
the party, and left by early trains for Grosmont. From thence they 
wandered up the Esk Yalley to Egton Bridge, or through the lovely 
Arncliffe Woods (with the kind permission of Mr. White), and to the 
village of GJaisdale, where a halt was made. The site of the Brigantian 
village was next explored, also the moor below the Roman road, and 
forward to Brick Hole for the picturesque cascades, Thomasin Foss and 
Mill Foss ; after which the party reassembled at the Goathland Hotel for 
tea. The botanists had a successful day amongst the ferns and mosses, 
and some fine examples of the oak and beech fern, and other rarer 
species were secured. The district traversed is a most lovely one, and 
the naturalists much enjoyed this their last excursion of the season. 

Manchester Cryftogamic Society. — Monthly meeting, August, 
Captain Cunlifie in the chair. — The hon. secretary read a number of 
letters from corresponding members of the society. Mr. G. A. Holt sent 
a number of mosses as a contribution to the society's herbarium, amongst 
them being some rare local mosses, including specimens of Mnium stellare 
and Gymnostomum calcareum in fruit, from Derbyshire. The secretary 
exhibited specimens of Campylopns hrevifolius, a very rare British moss, 
hitherto only recorded in Scotland. The moss had been sent by Mr. 
Boswell, he having discovered it last month on the banks of the Wye, 
near Builth. Dr. J. B. Wood, of Broughton, sent washed-out specimens 
of the same gathering to show that in the length of stems it difi"ered from 
the description given in Bryol. Eur. The secretary presented specimens 
of Campylopns paradoxus from Abergynolwyn ; Dicranum arcticum from 
Ben Mac Dhui ; and several interesting New Zealand hepatics. Mr. 
W. H. Pearson exhibited specimens of Marsupella alpina, collected on 
the Glyders, North Wales, by Mr. E. M. Holmes ; and specimens of a 
lichen, Dermatocarpon Garovaglii, by Mr. George Davis on the coast 
near Brighton. Mr. Pearson's exhibits were distributed amongst the 
members present. Captain CunlifFe exhibited and distributed a number 
of good cryptogams which he had recently gathered at Barmouth, amongst 
them were Philonotis rigida, Isopterygittm demissum, and Hypnum pimim, 
in excellent fruiting condition ; amongst the ferns were Asplenum lanceo- 
latum and Hymenophylliim tunhridgense. Mr. Wm. Foster exhibited four 
most elegant and fairy-like forms of Athyrium filix-foemina in a living 
condition. They had been grown in a little back yard in the neighbour- 



r.o 



The Naturalist. 



hood of Salford. These elegant varieties were first raised by Mr. Thos. 
Glover, of Manchester, some fifteen years ago. 

Monthly Meeting, Sept. 17th, Mr. W. H. Pearson, vice-president, in 
the chair. — Mr. T. R^ogers exhibited specimens of Sphacelaria phimicjeva, 
a recent addition to our list of British sea-weeds The specimens were 
gathered in July, oii muddy rocks at low water, Llanfairfechan, by Mr. 
J. Cosmo Melville, F.L.S., who very kindly sent specimens for distri- 
bution. Mr. Pearson laid upon the table for examination fasciculus I. of 
Holmes' Algce Britannico^, which included specimens of the sphacelaria. 
He also exhibited three new hepatics : Cesia latifolia (Lindb.), Lepidozia 
Wulfsbergii (Lindb.), and Eiccia pedemontana (Steph.). Dr. John 
Roberts sent a fresh-water alga from Anglesea, and this, upon examina- 
tion by Mr. West, proved to be Cho&tophora endivoefolia. About the same 
time Mr. Melville had also collected the same species in Lynn Ooron, 
Anglesea, specimens of which were mounted in a dried form for 
exhibition. Mr. West, of Bradford, sent several interesting species and 
varieties of British mosses, including the rare Fissidens rnfidus in fruit, 
specimens of which were distributed at the meeting. Mr. Harry Searle, 
of Ashton, sent vegetating spores of Chara, which he had been recently 
cultivating. The hon. secretary distributed fresh-gathered specimens of 
Flagiothecium sylvaticnm in fruit ; and Mr. Cash, who had just returned 
from some classic cryptogamic localities in Scotland, sent a packet of 
Tortula papillosa from Ayrshire for distribution. Mr. G. A. Holt sent 
specimens of Mylia Taylori with perfect capsules ; these he had found at 
Linton, Yorkshire. — Thos. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 

York and District Field Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Sep- 
tember 12th. — Mr. Wilkinson exhibited the following plants : — Scirpus 
taherncemontani^ Scutellaria minor, both of which were collected near 
Strensall, and are considered to be new to the district ; also specimens of 
Drosera rotundifolia, D. anqlica, D. intermedia. He also exhibited, on 
behalf of Mr. Henry Ibbotson, specimens of Dianthas Armeria and 
Br oralis racernosus, var. Bellottii. The former he rep(jrts to be nearly 
extinct in the neighbourhood, and the latter has recently been discovered 
on Clifton Ings. The chairman exhibited a box of fine insects, sent to 
him by Mr. S. J. Capper, of Buy ton Park, Liverpool, containing amongst 
others the following species : — !Selidoser,ia, plumaria^ Eupithecia pul~ 
chellata, E. dehiliata, Scotosia dubitata, Cymatophora ridens, Catocala 
spoftsa, Plusia inter rogationis, Notodonta trepida, Limacodes aselhis, and 
Bombyx trifolii. The hon. secretary, Mr. Prest, exhibited a specimen 
of that rare tortrix, Mixodia riibiginosana, taken by himself at Sandburn, 
and new to Yorkshire ; also a large and beautiful series of Cidaria 
immaftata, amongst them some remarkable varieties, a long series of 
Noctna neglecta, also taken at Sandburn, many varieties of Hypsipetes 
ehdata, and specimens of Nonagria brevilinea, Meliana flammea, and 
Leucania albipuncta. — W. Prest, Hon. Sec. 



THE WOOLHOPE CLUB AT HEREFORD.— FUNGUS 
FORAY. 

By H. T. Soppitt. 

During the first week in October the Woolhope Club held their 
sixteenth annual fungus foray. • 

For several years past I had read graphic accounts of the Woolhope 
meetings with considerable interest, and this year, having received an 
invitation, coupled with a most interesting programme, was determined 
to be present. 

Monday, Oct. 1st, arrival at Hereford, was the first item announced 
on the circular, and on that date I accordingly made my way thither. 

On arriving at Hereford I noticed a gentleman on the platform, and 
judging from his general contour, thought must be a fungologist ; 
upon making his acquaintance found I was right, for the gentleman in 
question was no less a personage than Dr. Bull, who at once informed 
me where I should find Canon Du Port and Mr. Broome, who had 
already arrived. At that moment a train steamed into the station, 
bringing Dr. Cooke and Dr. Wharton from London, and immediately 
afterwards Dr. Carlyle from Carlisle. 

Tuesday, Oct. 2nd. — The first excursion took place by rail, to 
Ludlow, for Moor Park and Woodeves Coppice. There was a good 
muster, the weather being very fine, and each one being provided with 
a basket. 

On arriving at Ludlow, waggonettes were in waiting, and the party 
eventually reached Woodeves Coppice, where fungi occurred in 
profusion. 

To some, all was fish that came to. the net was a rule, judging from 
the pretty coloured specimens of Ag, laccatus and other common highly- 
coloured species in their baskets, whilst others only gathered rare and 
critical species, and placed each species in separate paper bags. 

Cortinarii were extremely abundant. 

Hearing a shout in the distance, and fearing something had gone 
wrong, I hastened to the spot, and found half-a-dozen of the party 
surrounding several specimens of the rare Slrohilomyces strohilaceus. 

Our baskets gradually got filled, and the party slowly retraced their 
steps to Moor Park. 

On the way back, I recognised a voice in the wood, and found Mr, 
N.S., Vol. IX. Nov. 1883. 



62 



The Naturalist. 



Plowright, who had arrived later and followed the party, with Mr. 
Phillips and Rev. J. E. Yize. 

At two o'clock, the whole of the party had reached the mansion in 
Moor Park, where a most sumptuous luncheon was provided by Mr. 
Forster ; after which the gardens and conservatories were inspected. 

Near the park entrance several monstre specimens were gathered of 
Polyporus giganteus and P, dryadeus^ also large examples of Boletus 
Satanus, Later on in the day, the party was hospitably entertained 
at Abbey Villa, Ludlow, by Messrs. Fortey, and subsequently returned 
to Hereford, where the bulk of the fungi was deposited in the museum. 

In the evening the party met at the house of Dr. Bull, where the 
Rev. Canon Du Port read an instructive paper on the " Colours of 
Fungi," and was followed by a paper on " Recent Researches upon 
the Uredines," by Mr. C. B. Plowright. The latter dwelt chiefly on 
the connection of Puccinia arundinacea (not magnusiana) with 
JEcidium rumicis. 

Wednesday, Oct. 3rd. — Most of the party were up early studying 
the fungi, and towards nine o'clock the clouds assumed such a 
threatening attitude, that only four of us ventured on the Dinmore 
excursion. We were somewhat at a disadvantage, as our baskets had 
to be filled during a continuous downpour of rain which lasted several 
hours ; however, we were well repaid by the many good things we took 
back, and by the charming scenery about Dinmore. All the hedges 
were covered with Clematis vitalba, and many other rare flowering 
plants occurred in the woods. Arriving back at Hereford we found 
most of the party still busy with the fungi. 

Shortly afterwards the whole of the party got scattered at various 
dinner parties in the district, after which a meeting took place in the 
Woolliope Club Room, where an elaborate paper was read by Dr. 
Wharton (on behalf of Dr. Stewart) on the ^' Chemical Constituents of 
Fungi," followed by Mr. C. B. Plowright, on Jensen's Discoveries 
concerning the Potato Disease." 

Thursday, Oct. 4th, was the Club day. Three large waggonettes 
left Hereford for Hay ward Forest and Bryngwyn, several miles out, 
and where fungi were again abundant. 

A fine specimen of the tawny owl was taken from a trap and bagged 
by one of the party. 

On returning to Hereford upwards of seventy sat down to the 
public dinner at the Green Dragon, at which the Chanterelle was served 
(badly cooked). 

Dr. Bull made a brilliant speech, and Dr. Cooke followed with a 



SoppiTT : Fungus Foray at Hereford. 



63 



humourous paper on ^'A Missing Chapter from the Tramp Abroad." 
Later on, the party adjourned to the house of Mr. T. Cam, where several 
papers were read and a fine collection of drawings inspected, sent for 
exhibition by Mr. Massee, of Scarborough. At this stage of the 
proceedings I took my departure from Hereford, and arrived home at 
three in the morning. 

Friday, Oct. 5th., Dr. Carlyle informs, me was spent at Ledbury , 
where several good things were collected, including Ag, BucknallL 
The evening was devoted to the reading of papers, &c. 

Saturday, Oct. 6th. — The visitors took their departure. 



WM. WILSON'S TOUES IN SCOTLAND AND IRELAND. 

1827-1830. 



By Jas. Gash. 

(Read before the Manchester Cryptogamic Society^ April 16thy 1883.^ 
(^Concluded J 

SCOTLAND AND IRELAND : 1829-30. 

On the 17th of February, 1830, Mr. Wilson sailed from Dublin for 
Holyhead, where he spent some time botanising. On the 18th, during 
a walk to Trefriw rabbit warren, he gathered, amongst other things, 
Desmatodon nervosus. This moss he again found three days later in 
another locality. He also gathered Gymnostormm ccmicum {Fottia 
!Starkeana, var. (3), Phascum muticum^ P. rectum^ and Grmmia maritima. 
After this he went to Yr-allt-Fawr, and succeeded in finding Hypmm 
illecebriim and Grimmia trichoplLylla, Of Hypnum illecehrumhe, saw plenty 
afterwards at a place called Bryn ddu. He continued to botanise ift 
Anglesea and about Bangor until near the end of March, visiting Llyn 
Ogwen and Twll ddu ; also Cadnant, where he gathered Pterogonium 
gracile^ Grimmia trichophylla^ &c. In the previous year he had been 
fortunate in discovering, near this place, the rose which was named 
after him — Rosa TFikoni. 

On the 29th of March Mr. Wilson left Bangor on foot and walked 
to Abergele, putting up there at the " George lY." inn. I wish we 
botanists could record of every hostelry we enter what Wilson says of 
this : " Bed, comfortable, 6d. ; breakfast 8d." On the 30th he walked 
to Foryd (I suppose Rhyl was not then known even by name) and 
going on board the tidal packet, which sailed at two a.m. on the 
31st, he landed at Liverpool after a four hours' sail. Proceeding 
homeward on one of the Bridgwater packet boats, and leaving his 



64 



The Naturalist. 



baggage to be forwarded by canal from Runcorn, he walked to Pad- 
dington, which place he reached about dusk, after an absence from 
home of about nine months. 

This narrative would be incomplete if I did not read to you some of 
the correspondence which arose out of Mr. Wilson's sojourn in Ireland. 
On the 23rd December, 1830, Prof. Hooker wrote to Mr. Wilson as 
follows : — " My dear Sir : You will, I am sure, think that I pester 
you with letters, but the occasion upon which I now write to you 
is this : I was yesterday examining your lichens, and among them I 
found one which interested me exceedingly. You have marked it 84 
in your MSS. ; and again, it is one of two lichens in your number 
212 (the barren state.) The genus is Sticta. There is no British 
Sticta that at all approaches to it, either in habit or in character. But 
there is one, a foreign one, a native, too, of the Isle of France 
[Mauritius,] which I can hardly distinguish from it, at least some of 
its states — and that is Sticta macrophylla, which I have figured in the 
first number of my Botanical Miscellany. Do compare your plant with 
it, if you have the number of the Miscellany^ making allowance for 
the figure being made from the finest specimen I had, and of that 
variety * Apotheciis marginalihus^ whereas I have specimens of Sticta 
macrophylla as small as your plant, and with the apothecia scattered. 
In the paper marked 212, the barren plant is the Sticta^ the fertile one 
Parmelia tiliacea. You will see in the former the little pits or hollows 
{cyphellce) embedded in the downy lower surface of the frond, 
which are characteristic of the genus Sticta, Of your other lichens 
No. 171 is Sticta sylvatica, * * Pray have you much of the above 
new Sticta, or is there any person in the country who can gather more 
"of it? Can you spare a specimen for Sowerby to draw,* and one 
for Mr. Borrer ] Either Mr. Borrer or I will describe it for English 
Botany, unless you will do so. — Yours, &c., W. J. Hooker.'* 

Absence from home prevented Mr. Wilson answering this letter 
until the 7th of February. The absorbing question between them 
was — who, in Ireland, could be depended upon to gather the famous 
lichen ? Wilson thought of J. T. Mackay, the author of Mora 
Hibernica, but Mackay was living in Dublin, and might not immedi- 
ately be visiting the south. Hooker suggested Harvey, who lived at 
Limerick. This was apparently the first time that Wilson had heard of 
the young Quaker botanist. " There is," Hooker wrote, " a very 
zealous Irish botanist (and a Quaker), who is about to publish a work 
on new cryptogamic plants, but particularly algae. He draws very 
* For English Botany. 



Cash : Wilson's Tours in Scotland and Ireland. 65 



nicely, and will engrave the plates himself. As soon as the spring 
approaches, he will visit the south of Ireland, and I have particularly- 
urged him to seek for the Sticta macrophylla^ which he will do if we 
will send him the exact particulars of the station. No one can do this 
so well as yourself, and I have now to ask the favour of you to 
communicate with him ; and I am sure, if you wish it, he will gather 
the Sticta for you, and any other plant you may express a wish to have, 
and that he may chance to fall in with. His address is * W. H. 
Harvey, Esq., Summerville, Limerick.' In the spring he will make 
Killarney his head quarters for some time." * * 

Mr. Wilson lost no time in communicating with Harvey, and sent 
him full particulars of the habitat of the Sticta, In writing, he also 
sent Harvey specimens of iJypnum demismm and H, micans^ with a 
request that he would look out for these novelties also ; and on the 
9th of Feb., Harvey replied, telling Wilson of his contemplated 
journey, and also mentioning the fact of Kookeria Icete-virens being 
abundant at Turk Waterfall, and in fruit. 

Dr. Hooker happened to be preparing for the press his second 
volume (the Cryptogamia) of the British Flora, and on the 22nd March, 
lb32, he wrote to Wilson : I am working now at the lichens, and 
have printed about one-third of that family. Your Sticta is, unques- 
tionably, the most interesting British individual of the tribe. I shall 
be greatly disappointed if, after the full statement of the locality you 
have given to Mr. Harvey, he should fail to find it. With his corres- 
pondence I did not doubt you would be pleased ; and he is as much 
gratified in being put into correspondence with you." 

In April of that year Harvey went to Killarney. Though he was, 
as we may believe, interested in the search for Sticta macrophylla, yet he 
found opportunity for other work. He was at that time just twenty 
years old, and, as is the case with most young enthusiasts in Natural 
History, his pursuits were somewhat varied. They embraced bird- 
stuffing and shell collecting. Mosses and Jungermannia, flowering 
plants and sea-weeds, were alike welcome to him. In this particular 
journey he records the finding of Turbo politus, a rare shell, at Bantry, 
and also a new species of Lymnea {involuta), very distinct from any 
other, most like Lymnea glutinosa, but differing abundantly. (Memoir, 
p. 25.) But it is very surprising to find that the editor of the Memoir 
makes no mention of the commission given to Harvey with regard to 
Sticta macropliylla. At the end of April Hooker received a letter from 
Harvey announcing his success ; thereupon Hooker wrote to Wilson : 
"I have just heard from Harvey, and his letter is accompanied by 
specimens of the Sticta, It was very soon in fruit." 



66 



The Naturalist. 



Harvey's letter to Wilson, upon his return to Limerick, is worth 
reproducing, as it relates not only to the precious lichen, but also to 
some of the musci for which Wilson had asked him to be on the look 
out: — ''Limerick, 5 mo. 3rd, 1832. — Dear Friend: My journey to 
Killarney was unfortunately limited, by unavoidable circumstances, to 
the first week in April, and if I had not seized that opportunity of 
going, I saw no prospect of being able to visit it for the season. I 
may get there again for a week in August, but it is quite uncertain. 

'' This early travelling prevented me from getting many things, and 
I am sorry to say that I have got hardly any of thy requisites. To 
take them seriatim : 

Hypnum demissum : Thou must have miscalculated the time of- 
throwing up capsules. I could find none but old withered fruit, with 
here and there a very young seta peeping up. Of course I have none 
to send thee. 

Hypnum micans : I found a few small patches, but no fruit. 

" Stida macropJiylla : I gathered a good share of this, the principal 
part of which I have sent to our good friend Dr. Hooker, but I have 
reserved two or three specimens for thee. Dr. Hooker bespoke it long 
ago, and as he said he was ' sorely in want,' I deemed it right, in the 
first place, to relieve his necessities. If thine are very pressing I will 
keep them in view next trip. I gathered but little fruit, but I found 
it on several patches at Cromagloun, also in the one thou mentions at 
Turk cascade. At the first station I found one or two little scraps 
with marginal fruit. 

'' Hooker ia Icete-virens : I can give thee barren specimens, but I did 
not find a single capsule, and the station is much injured. I found a 
new station for this plant, and guess where ? On the wet dripping rocks 
opposite the station chair at Turk, growing among thy Marchantia 
irrigua ! Thou seems to have a strange fatality with regard to this moss. 

'' Marchantia irrigua : I gathered young fruit, which I can give thee, 
but took no drawing or description, seeing the fructification was 
only in embryo. The capsules had not burst their calyptra. The 
male fruit I am uncertain of ; what I called such, grew on the 
same frond as the female. 

'' Zygodon conoideiim and Gymnosiomum (Zygodo^i) viridissimum I 
have for thee. The latter was not in abundant fruit, but I have got a 
tolerable supply. It grows in this neighbourhood also, on elms, but 
seldom throws up a fruit stalk. 

Jim germannia Entchinsioe grovf^ in every mountain stream, but I 
could find no trace of fruit. 



Cash : Wilson's Tours in Scotland and Ireland. 



67 



Jungermannia cu7'vi/oUa : I can give thee a few bits, with ripe 
capsules. 

Tortula tortuom : The wall is re-sodded, and the plant destroyed. 
Oh, Goths and Vandals ! I found it, however, in other places, but 
with young set^, which are, of course, of no value. 

Bryum \_Mnium] cuspidatum with numerous setae I could not find. 
On the border of the Lake, however, I found Bryum [Mnium'] rostratum 
in that predicament. 

^' These are, I believe, most of thy Killarney plants which were to 
be seen. Bingidcula grandijlora was only just spreading its leaves. 
I shall bear thy Glengariff habitats in mind, should I visit that place 
this summer. I found thy experience of the greatest use at Killarney. 
Since I wrote thee, I have compared thy Gliara aspera with Aghardian 
specimens, and am convinced they are totally different. It is either 
Char a galioides of that author, or a new species ; but the specimens of 
C. galioides I examined were very imperfect, and I could form no 
certain opinion. If thou can afford me a specimen of thy Chara, I 
shall be much obliged. 

" Pray write me to say how I can send thee a parcel, and how it is 
to be directed. 

^*I remain very truly and respectfully thine, 

" W. H. Harvey. 

^^P.S. — Could thou possibly contrive to join Dr. Hooker's party to 
the Highlands in June ^ " 

With reference to the enquiry in the postscript, I may say that 
Wilson did not visit the Highlands that year. Harvey, however, 
formed one of Dr. Hooker's party, and a very happy time he seems, 
from his Memoir, to have had. 

Before closing, allow me to refer briefl.y to two of the mosses which 
Harvey had been asked specifically to look for — Hypnum demissum and 
H, micans. One of these (//. demissim) was discovered by Mr. Wilson 
during his Irish trip in 1829-30. Hypnum micans — or, as it is now 
called, Leskea micans — was so named by Mr. Wilson, and a description 
of the species first appeared in Hooker's British Flora. The localities 
given in Bryologia Britannica are : On shady rocks in the south of 
Ireland, not . yet found in fruit. Near Glengariff, Miss Hutchins. 
Cromagloun mountain and at Fila Doun, near Killarney, W. Wilson." 
The other species was figured by Mr. Wilson, and was first described 
by him in the English Botany Supplement. The localities given in 
Bryologia Britannica are as follow : On shady rocks in mountainous 
districts , Cromagloun mountain, near the upper lake of Kil}arney, and 



68 



The Naturalist. 



near Glengariff, Ireland, 1829." The Beddgelert locality in North 
Wales, mentioned in Bryologia^ was a subsequent discovery by Mr. 
Wilson. 



Rainfall for St}jf^mkr. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date o-f 
heaviest 
Fall. 


Amount 

of 

Heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

5-68 


19 


2718 


*23-68 


28 


1-64 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


7-70 


19 


34-62 


35-94 


29 


1-55 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


4-15 


23 


22-61 


tl8-07 


28 


0-84 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


4-80 


18 


26.52 


^25-17 


28 


0-86 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


5-21 


19 


25-06 


22-23 


28 


1-44 


Ikgbirchworth (do.) 


853 


6-98 


17 


35.87 


31-48 


28 


1-30 


"Wentworth Castle (do. ) . . . 


520 


4-99 


18 


26-89 


23-40 


28 


1-32 


GooLE ... (J. Harrlson) ... 


25 


4-87 


19 


20-47 


22-51 


28 


1-01 


Hull (Derringham) (^Ym. 

Lawton) 


10 


3.94 


20 


16-48 


20-06 


10 


1-15 



Scarborough Rainfall for September 3-79: 0-93 above average. — A. Rowntree. 
* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. f Average of 29 years, 1853-62 & 1865-83. 
J Average of 14 years, 1870-83. 



Slug new to Yorkshire. — I have a most important discovery by my 
indefatigable friend Mr. W. West to announce to the readers of the 
Naturalist. It is Limax cinereo-niger , one of the most recent additions 
to the British list of mollnsca. Mr. West found it on the 15th October, 
feeding on a fungus Cortinarius " in Shipley Glen, Mr. Soppitt being 
with him on the occasion. The species is a large one, and very hand- 
somely marked. Its nearest ally is the familiar Limax maximus, so well 
known for its being conspicuously spotted and striped with black. Our 
new species, on the contrary, differs from it in being uniformly coloured, 
generally black or extremely dark cinereous, but it always has the keel 
and a central line on the back in continuation of it pale, generally dirty- 
white. There are other marked differences between the two species, in 
the character of the rugosities on the back, and in respect of the 
colouring of the sole of the foot. In L, maximns the rugosities are only 
moderately developed, and the foot -sole is uniformly pale in colour ; but 
in L. chiereo-niger the rugosities are very large and strongly developed, 
and the foot-sole is di\ided longitudinally into three parts, of which the 
two outer ones are dsik roloured, and only the inner one is pale. 



Short Notes and Queries. 



69 



Another proof of their abundant distinctness is afforded by the researches 
of Ferdinando Sordelli, who demonstrated by careful dissection that there 
are important differences in the internal structure of the reproductive 
organs in the two species. L. cinereo-niger seems to be very rare in 
Britain, for the specimen of which I write is the first I ever saw, and of 
the records there are only about three which can be apportioned to it or 
its varieties in Britain ; but on the Continent it is well known and not 
uncommon. 1 will take advantage of this opportunity to say that 1 shall 
be extremely pleased to receive consignments of living slugs (which 
should be sent in air-tight tin boxes) from any part of the British Isles, 
especially the more remote districts. I am working at their distribution 
and variation, and wish to have all the species, common, as well as rare, 
from every county. So far I have had assistance from various corres- 
pondents, and nearly every parcel I have received has been productive of 
novelties for the British fauna, so utterly unworked have the slugs been 
up to this time. Mr. J. H. Salter sent me from Waterford a large 
number of forms, including Testacella Maugei, var. viridans, and the 
magnificent var. bicolor of Arioii ater^ both new to Britain. Mr. R. 
Kenton, of Fans, near Earlston, N. B., has also sent, numerous fresh 
things from that district, and Mr. E. J. Elliott, of Stroud, has been even 
more successful ; while my old friend Mr. C. Ashford, of Christchurch, 
Hants, has sent me specimens of all which occur with him, including a 
puzzling series of a species (or variety ?) which will afford much material 
for study. I am almost inclined to believe that I am on the track of a 
new species (new to Britain, that is). I shall be glad to receive the 
common species of as many more districts as possible, and it is my 
intention to publish notes from time to time upon such consignments as 
I may be favored with. — W. Denison Roebuck, Sunny Bank, Leeds, 
Oct. 18th, 1883. 

Fox Shark, &c., at Bridlington Quay.— Mr. Thomas Boynton, of 
Ulrome, writes me that on the 19th inst. a specimen of the thrasher, or 
fox shark, lift, long, was landed by some fishermen at Hornsea. Towards 
the end of August, two porbeagles were also taken by fishing-boats in 
Bridlington Quay. One of the latter is preserved by a Beverley bird- 
stuffer, and measures about 5ft. in the dried state. Sharks and their 
allied species appear, from fishermen's reports, to have been unusually 
numerous this autumn on our coast, probably attracted by the large 
shoals of herrings, of which extraordinary catches have been made. 
Though unconnected with Natural History, it may interest some of your 
readers to learn that Mr. Boynton has found and dug out near his village 
one of the primitive lake dwellings hitherto chiefly found in Switzerland, 
and fixed the site of at least four more. It is said to be the first instance 
of such a discovery in England. It has been recently examined by Dr. 
Munro, a gentleman deeply versed in the subject, and probably a 
report will appear in one of the scientific journals. — N. F. Dobrek, 
Beverley, 22nd Sept., 1883. 



70 



The Naturalist. 



Testacella Jialiotidea, var. scutulum m Yorkshire. — Referring to Mr. 
Butterell's record in the Naturalist for July (vol. viii., p. 186), I have 
seen one of the specimens, and on examination it proves to belong to the 
variety scutulum* So have other British specimens when carefully 
examined, and as a matter of fact there is doubt as to whether the typical 
form of the species occurs in the British Isles at all. At all events there 
is no direct evidence of its existence, and if any naturalist meets with it, 
he would confer a benefit on science by publishing the record. While 
writing, it may be placed on record that Beverley is not the only York- 
shire locality for Testacella, Mr. John Emmet, of Boston Spa, has on 
several occasions informed me and others of its occurring there in nursery 
gardens. In this case, not having seen specimens, I am unable to state 
to what form tliey appertained. These seem to be the most northerly 
localities for the species, so far as actual records show. — Wm. Denison 
BoEBUCK, Leeds, Oct. 5th, 1883. 

Natural History Notes from Wharfedale. — The following species 
may be added to the list of Upper Wharfedale shells given in June 
number of the Naturalist : — Zonites fulvus, Helix pygmmay Helix sericea, 
Helix concinna (young}. Vertigo pijgmoea, Carychium minimum, all from 
Grassington, and Deepdale near Grassington. — George Roberts, Loft- 
house, August, 1883. 

HUDDERSFIELD EXHIBITION. — NATURAL HiSTORY DEPARTMENT. — It 

may not perhaps be generally known to our readers that nearly the whole 
of the Natural History collection of the late Squire " Waterton has 
been kindly lent, and is now on view, at this Exhibition. The collection 
includes the cayman on which Waterton made his famous ride, beautiful 
specimens of humming-birds, a small chimpanzee, the celebrated non- 
descript," armadillos, many strange and curious species of crabs and 
lobsters, a splendid arrow tube about 10ft. long, and specimens of the 
arrows tipped with the wourali poison, &c., &c. This collection is all 
in one room, which also contains many other specimens of interest to the 
naturalist. In another room the geologist and mineralogist will find 
much to interest them. There is a splendid collection of almost all 
known kinds of precious stones ; a collection of agates lent by Prof. Jno. 
Ruskin ; a fair series of coal-measure and other fossils ; recent echino- 
derms, Crustacea, mollusca, corals, sponges, glass models of marine 
invertebrata ; about thirty species of mosses ; cases of moths and 
butterflies ; anthropological and ethnological photographs ; a fine series 
of plates and diagrams illustrating vegetable morphology and histology, 
lent by the Linnean Society of London ; Miss Ormerod's six diagrams 
of British insects injurious to farm produce ; and, finally nearly 300 
cases of British birds. Again, in Room No. 6, Scientific Instruments, 
there is a splendid display of various instruments for scientific research, 
far too numerous to particularise, but amongst them may be mentioned 
the following : — A number of first-class microscopes and implements ; a 



Reports of Societies. 



71 



splendid selection of tuning-forks and vibrative bars, lent by the late 
President of the Royal Society, Dr. Wm. Spottiswoode ; lantern and 
microscope lamps ; models of horizontal steam engines ; steam hammer ; 
Channel Tunnel boring machine, &c., &c. The scientific and Natural 
History student will find much to interest him for a whole day, 
irrespective of the other exhibits, and would be well repaid for a visit. 

Lepiboptera new to Yorkshire. — Among some micro-lepidoptera I 
took in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield during the present year, and 
which I recently submitted to Mr. C . G. Barrett for determination, I find 
are three species hitherto unrecorded for the county. Sciaphila perterana 
I took near Crosland Moor in July. Tinea merdella swarmed in July, in 
the old lot of wool in New-street, alluded to at vol. viii. Nat , p. 94 ; and 
the pretty Gelechia gemmella I found flying in plenty in September, in 
the old rough field adjoining Lepton Great Wood. Two other species 
are new to the South-west Riding, viz : Gelechia desertella and G. similellay 
both of which I took on Crosland Moor in July. — Geo. T. Porritt. 

NOTICES OF BOOKS, &c.— The Annual Report and Transactions 
of Wakefield Naturalists' Society, 1883." — Contains lists of papers read, 
account of local rambles, &c. The library seems to be at present only a 
small one, but may probably soon be increased. The most useful part of 
the Transactions " is the list, so far as published of the fauna and flora, 
which shows that the society is doing good local work. These lists 
include the shells — a very full one — migrant birds, with dates of arrival ; 
hymenoptera, coleo]_3tera (geodephaga only), and vertebrates. Other 
departments of zoology, and also the botany and geology, are promised 
in future issues. 

— The Practical Naturalist," No. 9, vol. i., contains simple and 
initiatory papers on skinning and preserving reptiles ; a short life-history 
of Vanessa lo ; notes on the recognition of the common minerals ; notes 
of meetings ; lists of macro-lepidoptera on the wing during June from 
seven districts, &c. We presume, though it is not so said, that this work 
is intended for beginners, and if it will only induce some of our young 
people to commence and continue the study of some branch of Natural 
History, it will do good service. 



Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Aug. 21st, the president 
in the chair. — Mr. Soppitt reported a visit to Grange, and exhibited 
specimens of Epipactis latifolia, a species of tamarisk, and a fungus 
commencing its growth on the juniper and completing it on the hawthorn. 
He also showed a live young nightjar, found at Black Hills, Bingley 
Wood, and reported that he had observed Hepialus sylvinus there. Mr. 
Andrews exhibited a specimen of Anagallis tenella found in Shipley Glen, 
and a number of plants from Devonshire, among which were Euphorbia 



72 



The Naturalist. 



amygdaloides, Erythroea pulchella, &c. Mr. Illingworth gave an account 
of an excursion to Kendal, and showed a hornets' nest taken there, and a 
specimen of the glow-worm ; he also exhibited a piece of a meteorite 
which fell in a field near Kendal. The president reported a ramble over 
Harden Moor with Mr. Butterfield, and exhibited Scoparia pyralalis and 
S. ambigualis from Shipley Glen (the former new to the district), Toi'trix 
icterana, from Grassington, and the following from Harden Moor : — 
S. coarctalis, T, viburnaiia, P. sauciana, E. angiistana, P. caledoniana, 
and P. monticolana, the three last being new to the district. Mr. West 
read an interesting paper on Lichens," and exhibited a large number of 
specimens collected in various parts of the country. 

Meeting Sept. 4th, the president in the chair. — Mr. Bennett read a 
paper on a visit to the Fisheries Exhibition, London, describing some of 
the various objects of interest to be seen there. Mr. Soppitt gave an 
account of a ramble over Barton Moor, where, among other things, he 
found Xenodochus carhonarms and Puccinea lychnidiarum. In the 
excursion with the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union on the 1st September he 
met with Actcea spicata and Puccinea sessilisy the latter a very minute 
fungus ; also Serratula tinctorial which is an addition to the list of 
flowering plants of the district. Mr. Kershaw exhibited a collection of 
insects from the Isle of Man, among which were three species not found 
in this district. Mr. Ward gave an account of a ramble through Wens- 
leydale, with remarks on the geological formation of the district. He also 
gave a report of a visit to the Huddersfield Exhibition, and of the Natural 
History objects shown there. The remainder of the evening was spent in 
the examination of microscopical objects exhibited by Messrs. A. J, 
Kershaw, J. E. Fawcett, J. Faull, and B. Spencer, among which were a 
number of slides containing objects illustrating the paper on lichens read 
by Mr. West at the last meeting. 

Filey Meeting, Y.N.U.— Conchological Section.- The Rev. W. 0. 
Hey, president of the section, reported that owing to the unfavourable 
weather but few species had been observed, and these were mostly of 
common occurrence. The best find was Pupa ringens, of which one 
specimen was taken. Limax (Amalia) marginatus, found in the Ravine, 
was also an addition to the Filey list. Altogether the following species 
were seen— 17 land, 3 freshwater, and 22 marine : — Arion ater, A. hor- 
tensis, Limax agrestis, L. marginatus, Succinea putris, Vitrina pellucida, 
Zonites crystallinus, Z. eellarius, R, nitidulus, Z. fulvus, Helix nemoralis, 
H. hortensis, H. hispida, H. virgata, H. ericetorum, Cochlicopa lubrica, 
Pupa ringens, Planorbis spinorbis, Limnsea peregra, L. truncatula. 
Marine : Saxicava rugosa, Lupraria elliptica, Solen siliqua, Venus 
striata, Mactra stultorum, Donax anatinus, Anomia ephippium, Tellina 
tenuis, T. balthica, Cyprina islandica, Trochus cinereus, T. helicinus 
Purpura lapillus, Helcion peliucidum, Patella vulgata, Chiton cinereus, 
Littorina litorea, L. obtusata, L. nidis, Buccinum undatum. Lacuna 
vincta, Rissoa striata. 



Reports of Societies. 



73 



HiJDDERSFiELD Naiuralists' SOCIETY. — Meeting Sept. 22nd, Mr. A. 
Clarke, v. p. in the chair. — Mr. Allen Godward exhibited Solomon's seal 
from a new locality near Thunder Bridge ; also Gentiana Amarella from 
the same district. Mr. F. Ellis exhibited five specimens of Oporahia 
filigrammaria, taken this season near Meltham, Huddersfield ; Mr. 
Mosley, a very beautiful nest of the long-tailed tit, sent to him by 
Mr. Kerry, of Harwich, for figuring in his work on British Birds." 
Mr. Clarke gave a very interesting lecture on Fungi," illustrated by a 
good collection of freshly-gathered specimens. 

Meeting October 8th, Mr. A. Clarke in the chair. — The chairman 
exhibited about 30 species of fungi, including Lactarius serriflnns^ new to 
the district. Mr. Morley exhibited a nest of the Dartford warbler, made 
entirely of flower stems and flowers of Aira flexuosa, and sent to him for 
figuring in his British Birds," by Mr. Fredk. Bond, F.Z.S. Nine of 
the Ordnance Survey maps, which had been purchased to represent the 
Society's district, were laid on the table. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Malham, Sept. 1st. — The closing 
meeting for 1883 was devoted to the exploration of Malhamdale, including 
Malham Tarn and Plateau, the picturesque scenery of Gordale Scar and 
Malham Cove, and resulted in much useful work being done. Only one 
party was arranged — a geological one — but other members grouped them- 
selves into small parties for the time being, and others again pursued 
independent researches. A few botanists and conchologists who took the 
field early in the forenoon, made their way to the plateau on which 
Malham Tarn is situate. Here they were entertained to a sumptuously- 
provided luncheon at Malham Tarn House by the High Sherifl" of York- 
shire (Mr. Walter Morrison), to whose kindness and hospitality during 
the day the Union was much indebted. After luncheon the conchological 
party were provided with boats by Mr. Morrison, and devoted the after- 
noon to the exploration of the moUuscan fauna of the Tarn, with a 
satisfactory result. The botanists were led by Mr. Morrison and his 
gardener to various localities on the Moor, and they also were able to 
render a good account of themselves. The geological party which had 
been arranged by Mr. J. W. Davis, the president of the section, met at 
Settle about noon, and walked eastwards. They first visited Langclifie 
Scars and the Victoria Cave, and then made for Malham Moor, pro- 
ceeding by way of Stockdale Farm. The line of the great Craven fault 
runs in this direction. To the north are the limestone scars of Lang- 
clifie, whilst the raised grounds to the southward constitute the millstone 
grit of Kirby Fell, the highest point of which, Ryeloaf Hill, is 1794 feet 
above sea-level. The division between the two formations is very 
distinctly marked by the character of the vegetation, the limestone being 
covered with the even green herbage characteristic of the Craven 
district ; whilst the millstone grit of the other side is clothed with sedges 
and heather. The party then proceeded across the moors to the place 
where the water from the Tarn sinks — to re-appear again at the foot of 



74 



The Naturalist. 



the Cove. The waters collected in Malham Tarn from the hilly district 
beyond form the source of the river Aire, and half-a-mile from the 
lower end of the Tarn the stream which issues from it sinks into one of 
the pot-holes so characteristic of the mountain limestone. In this 
instance the orifice is filled to the top with loose round stones. The 
opening is exactly on the line of one branch of the Craven fault. 
Proceeding from the Water Sinks," the party passed between the great 
clifis worn by the stream, which had made its way in that direction 
before finding its present channel. The geologists came out at the top of 
the Cove, and having passed over the limestone pavement, thej^ made a 
slight detour to the right, and descended to the valley, making the best 
of their way along the course of the stream to Malham village. Here all 
parties met, and tea was served, and the usual meetings held at the Buck 
Hotel. The general meeting was presided over by Mr. Walter Morrison, 
High Sheriff of Yorkshire. The minutes of the previous meeting were 
taken as read. Fourteen societies were found to be represented, viz : — 
Beverley, Bradford (Naturalists'), do. (Scientific Ass.) Dewsbury, Elland- 
cum-Greetland, Halifax, Keighley, Liversedge, Leeds (all three), Wake- 
field, Shipley, and York and district. The individual attendance was 
about 50 or 60. Eleven new members were elected, viz : — Mr. Geo. W. 
Oldfield, M.A., Harrogate ; Mr. John W. Morkhill, Killingbeck Lodge, 
Mr. R, M. Jaques, Easby Abbey, near Richmond ; Rev. Canon J. J. 
Pulleine, Kirby Wiske, near Thirsk ; Mr. Wm. Bethell, J.P., D.L., 
Rise Park, near Hull ; Mr. R. D. Horne, Leyburn ; Mr. A. D. H. 
Leadman, Boroughbridge ; Mr. John Hutton, Solberge, near North- 
allerton ; Mr. T. E. Buckley, F.Z.S., Millerton, Invernessshire ; Mr. 
Henry Wilson, Cottingham, near Hull ; and Mr. Robert Mortimer, of 
Timber, East Riding. A new Society was unanimously admitted into 
the Union on the motion of Mr. P. F. Lee, seconded by Mr. J. W. 
Davis, viz., the Doncaster Juvenile Naturalists' and Scientific Society, 
numbering 24 members. A hearty vote of thanks was then presented to 
Mr. Morrison for his kindness and hosi)itality to the members, and for 
the permission granted to the Union to ramble over his estates. This 
was proposed by Mr. J. W. Davis, seconded by Mr. Washington Teasdale, 
F.R.M.S., of Leeds, and, after being unanimously adopted by the 
meeting, was responded to by Mr. Morrison. The Sections were then called 
upon to report, the first being the Geological, for which its president, 
Mr. J. W. Davis, F.S.A., F.L.S., F.G.S., of Halifax, gave the account 
which we summarise at the beginning of this article. In the absence of 
the ofiicers of the Vertebrate Section, Mr. Leonard Gaunt, of Parsley, 
reported that of birds had been observed 19 resident species — the rook, 
kestrel, merlin, mallard, lapwing, snipe, kingfisher, chaflrinch, linnet, 
sparrow, redbreast, hedge sparrow, meadow pipit, ringdove, dabchick or 
little grebe, coal tit, blue tit, pied wagtail, and wren — and four migrants 
— the wheatear, redstart, swallow, and house martin. In mammalia only 
a field-mouse had been reported ; of amphibians the frog only, and of 



Reports of Societies. 



75 



fishes trout and stickleback, both in Malham Tarn. On behalf of the 
secretary of the Conchological Section (Mr. J. Darker Butterell) and 
himself, who had been working the Tarn during the afternoon, Mr. W. 
Denison Roebuck reported that they were very well satisfied with the 
result of their investigation, although time had not permitted of the 
examination of more than about a third part of the Tarn. The fauna 
proved to be somewhat richer than might have been expected from the 
height of the Tarn above sea-level (nearly 1300 feet), and several of the 
species found exhibited interesting tendencies to variation. One of the 
most interesting was "^Limnsea stagnalis. var. fragilis, sub-var. variegata, 
the second time of its occurrence in the British Isles. It was abundant 
on Potamogeton lucens. Others were ^Sphaerium corneum, var. nucleus 
(common), Pisidium pusillum (common), "^Valvata piscinalis (a few, 
approaching var. acuminata in form), *Bythinia tentaculata (dead shells), 
*Planorbis nautileus (one specimen), PI. contortus (very abundant, 
though small in size ), *Limn8ea peregra var. ovata (dead shells). Under 
logs of wood close to the margin of the Tarn were specimens of Limnsea 
truncatula var. minor, and a dwarf form of Succinea putris, together 
with two species of slugs, *Limax laevis and Limax agrestis. On the 
river Aire, where it issues from the Cove, were found specimens of 
L. peregra var. ovata, and Ancylus fluviatilis var. albida ; several of 
these were additions to the recorded fauna of the district. To land-shells 
not much attention was paid during the day, as this branch of the fauna 
is comparatively well known, whereas of the freshwater forms of the Tarn 
absolutely nothing whatever had been recorded, The list of land-shells 
included Arion ater, Zonites crystallinus, Z. alliarius, "^Helix aspersa, 
H. nemoralis, H. arbustorum and var. pallida, H. hispida and var, sub- 
rufa, H. sericea, H. rufescens, H. rotundata, H. rupestris, Clausilia 
rugosa and var. dubia, Pupa umbilicata, and Cochlicopa lubrica. The 
species and varieties marked with the asterisk (*) are new to the district. 
The total number of forms observed was 31. In Entomology Mr. G. C. 
Dennis (in the temporary absence of the secretary of the section, Mr. 
E. B. Wrigglesworth), reported as follows : — Yery limited was the 
time which we were able to devote to the entomology of the 
district. Our route lay from Settle by way of Victoria Cave to 
Malham Tarn and Cove, and we did not leave the Old Town until 
one p.m. We did, however, by dint of hard work and much scheming, 
manage to secure about 24 species of coleoptera — none of them 
unknown, though many not common. Had an entomological party been 
formed, and confined their attention to Malham and the district about a 
mile round, we should have had more to record. The following are the 
coleoptera taken during the day's excursion : — Cychrus rostratus. Linn., 
near Victoria Cave ; Nebria complanata. Linn., above Victoria Cave ; 
Lebia cyanocephala. Linn., Malham Cove ; Patrobus excavatus, Payk. , 
Settle ; P. assimilis, Chd. , Malham ; Hydroporus picipes, Fabr., Malham 
Tarn ; Colymbetes pulverosus, St., Malham Tarn ; Acilius sulcatus. 



76 



The Naturalist. 



Linn., Malham Tarn ; Gyrinus bicolor, Payk. , Malham Tarn ; 8ilpha 
thoracica, Linn., near Malham ; Agelastica halensis, Linn, near Malham ; 
Graptodera oleracea, Linn., near Malham ; Crepidodera aurata, Foudr., 
near Malham ; Phyllotreta undnlata, Kutsch , near Malham ; Aphthona 
coerulea, Payk., near Settle ; Thyamis brunnea, Redt., near Settle ; T. 
melanocephala, Gyll., near Victoria Cave ; Coccinella obliterata. Linn., 
Malham ; C. bipunctata, Linn, near Malham Cove ; Scymnus discoideus, 
111., Malham ; Ocypus oleus. Mull., above Victoria Gave ; Xantholinus 
tricolor, Fabr., Settle-road ; Othius melanocephalus, Gr., near Malham ; 
Lithocharis obsoleta, Nord, near Settle. For the Botanical Section the 
secretary, Mr. P. F. Lee, reported upon the day's work. The botanists 
had mustered in force, and enjoyed to the full the various routes taken 
in this classic hunting-ground. The total number of phanerogams, ferns, 
&c. , of the London Catalogue of British Plants, collected or observed at 
Gordale Scar, Cove, in smiling Airedale from Bell Busk, and on the route 
from Settle to Malham, was 291, thus making the last ramble the best' of 
the season in point both of numbers and rarity of specimens. After 
partaking of the High Sheriff's hospitality at the Tarn House, we worked 
the Tarn Bog, and under the guidance of Mr. Morrison himself, with his 
head gardener, we saw some flourishing specimens of the great English 
sundew, Drosera anglica, planted last year by the High Sheriff, with the 
hope they may establish themselves. The bog also yielded us an 
additional district plant, the interesting Serratula tinctoria, var. monti- 
cola, having almost sessile and larger flower-hearts than the type. In the 
grounds at the Tarn House are successfully cultivated many rare alpines 
and ferns, both foreign and district plants. The rarest of the many good 
things noticed during the day were the following, mostly fruiting : — 
ActsBa spicata, Draba muralis, D. incana, the variety of the alpine penny- 
cress, Thlaspi occitanum, Viola lutea, Geum intermedium, Sedum 
Telephium, var. purpurascens, Galium sylvestre, Carduus heterophyllus, 
Polemonium coeruleum ; a dwarf mountain form of Myosotis sylvatica, 
Primula farinosa, Salix repens, var. argentea, Potamogeton lucens, P. 
densus. Orchis latifolia, sub-sp. incarnata, Carex capillaris, C. fulva, C. 
vesicaria, Sesleria coerulea, and Asplenium viride. Mr. H. T. Soppitt 
of Bradford, who had been paying attention to the fungi, reported that 
the district was peculiarly rich in epiphyllous species. Amongst those 
gathered was JEcidium prenanthis, accompanied by Puccinea prenanthis, 
P. sessilis, P. poarum, and several Phragmidia. Of the larger species 
very few were seen ; these included Ag. squarrosus, Ag. mollis, Ag. 
infundibuliformis, and Helvella lacunosa. Altogether, about 50 species 
were gathered. — A vote of thanks to Mr. Morrison for occupying the 
chair, brought the meeting to a close, after which the members drove to 
the station to catch a Midland express which it had been arranged should 
be specially stopped for their convenience at Bell Busk station. A small 
party of members received still further attention from Mr. Morrison, and 
stayed over Sunday to enjoy his hospitality at the Tarn House. — W.D.R. 



STRtNSALL DE5M!DE>£. 




NATURALIST. PL vii. 



B, BROWN, 
^Publisher, H udders field. 



THE ALa^ OF STRENSALL COMMOJST. 

By W. Barwell Turner, F.O.S., F.R.M.S., &c. 
PLATE VII. 

When I paid a visit to Strensall with the Y.N.U. on July 14th last, 
it happened that I was the only collector of aquatic algae. The 
amount of material collected was, unfortunately, then but small, as 
I only had three small bottles aDd two little tubes, and I soon found 
that they were very inadequate to my wants. It is a matter for regret 
that more gatherings were not then secured, as our visit took place 
after a short period of dry weather ; and the pools were in better order 
(our brethren of the net and bottle will understand this), than they 
had been for some time. On arrival at Leeds, I arranged for a 
thorough examination of my plants, and soon succeeded in making out 
a tolerable list ; but, during my work, I found that I came across 
numbers of things either unknown to me or very puzzling, so I was 
fain to seek assistance. My first thought was of Dr. M. C. Cooke, to 
whom I wrote, but was sorry to find him suffering from ill health and.over 
work ; so in my dilemma, I was very grateful to find a helping hand in 
my friend Mr. A. W. Wills, of Birmingham, who is a well-known 
authority on the subject, and who kindly gave me the benefit of his 
assistance with the Desmidieae. After working some time, it became 
apparent that our material was not adequate to a thorough investigation, 
so, at Mr. Wills' request, I went again to Strensall on July 29th, 
when I was able to secure a larger collection, but found the place in 
very poor condition for work, as heavy rains had intervened. One 
accident occurred with (to me) deplorable results, with respect to my 
first gathering — I had worked over part thereof, and wished to have a 
clean bottle handy for transferring, so emptied one for the purpose, 
when to my amazement and disgust I found I had thrown away the 
contents of a bottle I had not thoroughly examined, and with it my 
chance of positively being assured of the existence of two rare species^ 
specimens of which I had already found in the said bottle, and had 
sketched them by way of note. For the latter I am thankful, as, 
although my second journey was productive of sundry novelties, I did 
not again find the forms alluded to, viz : — Stanradrim PringsJieimii 
and S. anatinum ; also the form which I believe to be S.megacantJuim, 
I have accordingly entered these in my list, with a query attached to 
them. 

N.S., Vol. ix. Deo., 1883. 



78 



The Naturalist. 



As mentioned in my short note lately (Aug. N., p. 24), diatoms were 
very few as to species found, and those but common ones, though I 
think S. spicula is a new record. 

The Algae are such as one would expect to find in such a habitat, 
though several common species and genera were not seen, but 
they probably exist. 

As might be anticipated, fresh-water rhizopods were plentiful, with 
some of the smaller entomostraca, &c. ; among these I may mention 
en passanty Arcella vulgaris^ Bifflugia proteiformisj Adimphrys sol^ 
Trachelocerca viridis, Keronajnytilus^ Cantliocamptus mimitus, and Amcebce, 
The pretty Infusorian BinohryorCsertularia was abundant. 

It may be as well to mention that the drawings of Desmidiese are 
usually made (by common consensus of opinion) to a uniform scale of 
400 diameters, and this is a good rule in papers which relate to the 
controversial side of botany ; but on the present occasion I have 
thought well to violate it in order to show more of the strange forms 
which desmids present. On another point — that of measurement — I 
quote Mr. Wills (Midland Nat. 1881, p. 41). The unit -01 m.m., 
is recognised by continental botanists under the symbol fi, and the 
dimensions of the Desmidiese are recorded in the following manner : — 
' e.g. Long. = 21 /i ; Lat. = 20-21 /x ; Lat. isthmi = 5 /x.' It is only in 
this country that the barbarous notation of inches and their decimal 
parts still lingers." These remarks now apply to all micro-metric work. 
I trust the reference to this will be excused, for though a small matter 
of detail, it is yet important, and saves much comparison and calculation. 

In the accompanying list there are many forms in the genus 
Cosmarium, and several in that of Closterium, as yet undetermined. 
I think, moreover, that the Staurastra will repay further search. 

For the filamentous algse and diatoms I have not given all the 
" authorities," deeming such as are given to be sufficient for the Union 
lists, and some I have not at this moment. 

Four specimens have a query against them. Of three I feel tolerably 
sure, having drawn them under the microscope ; of the fourth {S. Prmgs- 
Jieimii) my drawing is not quite satisfactory, though very near the form. 

Finally, I must roundly state my opinion that in the various descrip- 
tions of new species by many authors, too many varieties have been 
exalted into species. To anyone curious on this point T refer Dr. M. C. 
Cooke's remarks on the forms of Tetrachastrum in " Grevillea " for 
March, 1881. 

The specimens marked with an asterisk are, I think, new to 
England ; though either Mr. Archer, of Dublin, has found them in 



Turner : The Alg^e of Strensall Common. 



79 



Ireland, or Mr. Wills at Capel-Curig, in Wales. To the latter 
gentleman my best tlianks are due for his kindly assistance and 
cordial co-operation. 



ALGJS. 

Batrachospermum vagum, var. tenuis- 

simum, Ag. 
Chsetophora tuberculosa, Hooker 
C. elegans, Hs. 
Draparnaldia plumosa, Ag. 
Coleochsete scutata, Breb. 
Conferva floccosa, Ag. 
Ulotlirix mucosa 
Mougeotia genuflexa, Ag. 
Zygnema Vaucherii, var. stagnale, 

Kirsch. 
Z. anomalum. R. 
Z. stellinum, Vaucher. 
Z Ralfsii, Hs. 

Zygogonium ericetorum, var. aqua- 

ticum, De B. 
Spirogyra nitida, Dillwyn. 
S. tenuissima, Hs. 
Mesocarpus scalaris, Hs. 
M. parvulus, Hs. 
M. nummiiloides, Hs. 
CEdogonium vesicatum, Lyng. 
QE. delicatulum, Kz. 
Microspora fugacissima, Thurst. 
Bulbochsete setigera, Ag. 
B. rectangularis, Wittr. 
Ecbinella articulata. 
Anabaina circinalis, Bory, 
Volvox globator, Linnaeus. 
Gonium pectorale, Miiller. 
Pediastrum Boryanum, Turb. 

B. tetras. 
„ „ var. granula- 

turn, Kz. 
P. Ehrenbergii, Br. 
P. pertusum, Kz. 
Pandorina morum, Bory. 
Scenedesmus quadricauda, Turp. 
S. obliquus, Turp. 
S. acutus, Meyen. 
Sorastrum spinulosum, Ng. 
Phaphidium falcatum, Pab. 
Polyedrium tetrahedricum, Ng. 
P. enorme, P. 



Oscillatoria nigra, Yaucber. 
Leptothrix ochracea, Kz. 
Apiocystis Brauniana, Kg. 
Chlorococcum gigas, Grun. 
Eremospbaera viridis, De B. 
Botryococcus Braunii, K>. 
Glseocystis rupestris, Lyng. 

G. ampla, Kz. 

Chlamydococcus pluvialis, Br. 
Palmella byalina, Breb. 
P. mucosa, Kz. 

DIATOMACE^. 
Achnanthidium lanceolatum 
Synedra lanceolata 
Gomphonema geminatum 
Tabellaria flocculosa 
Pinnularia radiosa 
Cocconema lanceolatum 
0. parvum 
Stauroneis spicula 
Diatoma elongatum 
D. vulgar e 

DESMIDIE^. 
Gonatozygon Ralfsii, De B. 
Hyalotheca dissiliens, Breb. 

H. mucosa, Ehr. 
Didymoprium Borreri, R. 
D. Grevillei, Kz. 
Desmidium aptogonum, Breb. 

D. Swartzii, Ag. 
Sphaerozosma vertebratum, R. 
S. excavatum, R. 
Micrasterias papillifera, Breb. 
M. crenata, Breb. 

M. denticulata, Breb. 
M. rotata, R. 

M. Crux-Melitensis, Ehr. 
Spondylosium pulchellum, * Arclier's 

form a, Bail. 
Euastrum elegans, Breb. 

E. pectinatum, Breb. 
E. binale, R. 

E binale, var. elobatum, Ld. 
E. verrucosum, Ehr. 



80 



The Naturalist. 



S. arachne, R. 
S. IsBve, R. 
S. avicula, Breb. 

* S. inflexum, Breb. 

* S. anatinum ? C. and W. 
S. margaritaceum, Men. 
S. furcigerum, Breb. 

* S. pseudo-furcigerum ? Eeinscb 
S. polymorphum, Breb. 
S. cristatum, Breb. 
S. hirsutum, Breb. 
S. acnleatum, Men. 

* S. megacanthum ? Ld, 
S. tetracerum, R. 
S. gracile, R. 

* 8. Sebaldi, Eeinscb 

* S. Pringsheimii ? Reinscb 
S. pilosnm, A. 

S. aversum (or brevispina, Breb.) Ld. 
S spinosum, Breb. 
S. paradoxum, Meyen 
Penium Brebissonii, Men. 
P. digitus, Breb. 
Closterium setaceum, Ehr. 
C. lineatum, Ehr. 
C. lunula, Ehr. 
0. Dianse, Ehr. 
C. acutum, Breb. 
C. costatuni, Cor. 
C. juncidum, R. 
C. angustatum, Kz. 
C. Leibleinii, Kz. 
C. attenuatum, Ehr'. 
Tetmemorus Brebissonii, R 
T. granulatus, R. 
Spirotaenia condensata, Breb. 

PosTCRiPT. — Since compiling my lists in September I have to make the 
following additions, &c. : Xanthidium aculeatum (Ehr.) ; X. Brebissonii 
(R.) var. (3 ; Staurastrum cuspidatum ; S. polymorphum (both Breb.) ; 
S. vestitum (R.) ,The existence of S. Pringsheimii I have proved by 
finding other specimens. I find that the specimen on plate, fig. 19, is 
Staurastrum dejectum, var. y connatum (Lundell, Desm. Snec), a variety 
new, I believe, to England. One curious form occurs, a Micrasterias, 
apparently combining the characters of M. crenata and M. truncata. 
Concerning these, Kalfs says, p. 76, I have seen some specimens which 
make it doubtful whether they be really distinct." The gathering is yet 
far from being exhausted," for I have a number of forms which still 
defy my efibrts to clear up their identity. To the Diatoms are added 
Nitzschia lanceolata, N. minutissima, Navicula amphirhynchus, and 
Stauroneis phaenicenteron. 



E. ansatum, Ehr. 

E. didelta, R. 

E. oblongum, R. 

Arthrodesmus convergens, Ehr. 

A. incus, Hs. 

Docidium baculum, Breb. 

D. clavatum, Kz. 

D. clavatum, var. B. with projecting 

suture 
D. nodulosum, Breb. 

* Cosmarium truncatellum, Perty 
C. undulatnm, var. minutum, Wittr. 
C. botrytis, Men. 

C. margaritiferum, Men. 

C. orbiculatum, R. 

C. globosum, vel. bioculatum, Breb. 

C. cucumis, Cor. 

C. Meneghinii, Breb. 

C. quadratum, Breb. 

C. cucurbita, Breb. 

C. pyramidatum, Breb. 

C. undulatum, var., Cor. 

C. crenatum, R. 

C. ornatum, var., R. 

* C. proemorsum, Breb. 
C. amoenum, Breb. 
Xanthidium armatum, Breb. 
X. cristatum, Breb. 

X. fasciculatum, Ehr. 
X. fasciculatum, var. B. polygonum, 
Ehr. 

X. octocorne, Ehr. 

Staurastrum teliferum, R. 

S. orbiculare, R. 

S. punctulatum, Breb. 

S. alternans, Breb. 

S. dejectum, Breb. 



Carter : Wharfedale Entomological Notes. 81 



REFERENCES TO PLATE VII. 

1. Staurastrum avicula, a rather taller form than E-alfs'. — 2. This 
may possibly be either a Staurastrum or Xanthidium. The blunt spines 
are peculiar. — Staurastrum sp. ? — 4. Staurastrum anatinum ; if not 
anatinum it is a very near form. Two positions shewn. — 5. Euastrum 
binale ; generally distributed on heaths. — 6. Staurastrum aristiferum. 
7. Xanthidium octocorne. — 8. Staurastrum Sebaldi : previously dis- 
covered as a British plant by Mr. Wills in 1880, at Capel Curig. 

9. Staurastrum aculeatum : generally distributed, but not common. — 

10. Staurastrum megacanthum 1 so like, that I deem it the true species. 
See remarks on No. 8. — 11. Staurastrum pilosum : not common. — 12. 
Xanthidium fascicalatum. — 13. Staurastrum furcigerum : this and the 
one preceding it are very common. — 14. Staurastrum inflexum : see 
No. 8. — 15. Staurastrum margaritaceum : a widely-distributed species. — 
16. Xanthidium sp. ? pronounced to be so by Dr. M. C. Cooke ; species 
doubtful, possibly a deviation from X. octocorne. 17. Xanthidium sp. ? 
Copy of one drawn by me from a Welsh specimen of Mr. Wills, to 
compare with No 16. — 18. Cosmarium amoenum : Ralfs gives habitats 
Ambleside and Dolgelly, not common. — 19. Staurastrum sp. 1 — 20. Stau- 
rastrum arachne : Ralfs says Dolgelly, very rare ; Aberdeen." — 21. 
Staurastrum pseudo-f urcigerum 1 This form approaches . the species 
mentioned, but yet may be only a variety of S. furcigerum. No. 13 ; see 
remarks on No. 8. — 22. Micrasterias papillifera : generally distributed, 
but not common. — 23. Micrasterias Crux-Melitensis : a rare species. — - 
Nos. 1 to 21 are X- 260, Nos. 22, 23 X 275 diams. 



WHARFEDALE ENTOMOLOGICAL NOTES. 



By J. W. Carter. 



The following observations were made by my friends Messrs. J. 
Firth, of Bradford, E. P. P. Butterfield, of Wilsden, and myself, 
during a walk from Silsden to Grassington, on the banks of tlie 
Wharfe, from Addingham, on the 28rd of June last. In the evening 
in Grass Wood, we tried the attractive mixture known as sugar," 
but not a single specimen visited it. It was our intention to remain 
in the neighbourhood of Grassington the whole of the following day, 
but owing to an unfortunate circumstance — one of our party being 
taken seriously ill — we were compelled to leave very early in the 
morning. 

As the insect fauna of Wharfedale is very imperfectly known, we 
think it advisable to give a complete list of our captures. 



82 



The Naturalist. 



N. mundana. Larvae commonly at Biirnsall. 
L. complanula. One larva, at Bolton Woods. 

H. huranli. Grassington. 

B. callunas. Larvae in Gill Beck Wood. 
O. bidentata. Grass Wood. 

P. pilosaria. Larvae, Bolton Woods. 

I. lactearia. Grass Wood. 
A. candidata. do. 

V. cambricaria. Bolton Woods and Barden. 

C. pusaria. Bolton Woods. 

F. piniaria. Gill Beck and Grass Woods. 

A. ulmata. Bolton and Grass Woods. 

H. defoliaria and aurantiaria. Larvae very abundant in Bolton Woods. 

O. dilutata. Larvae, Bolton Woods. 

L. pectinitaria. Gill Beck Wood. 

L. caesiata. do. 

E. alchemillata. Grass Wood. 

E. albulata. Common from Bolton Woods to Grassington. 
E. decolorata. Grass Wood. 

E. lariciata, very common. Gill Beck and Grass Woods. 

E. vulgata. Near Addingbam. 

M. tristata. Very abundant, Gill Beck Wood. 

M. rivata. Gill Beck Wood. 

M. subtristata. do. 

M. montanata. Everywhere. 

M. fluctuata. Bolton Woods. 

C. propugnata. do. 

C. ferrugata. Gill Beck and Grass Woods. 

C. corylata. Bolton Woods. 

C. suffumata. Grass Wood. 

N. camelina. Bolton Woods. 

T. batis. Grass Wood. 

S. ambigualis. Barden and Grassington. 

S. pyralalis. Grassington. 

C. pratellus. Common, Silsden Moor. 

T. ministrana. Common. 

T. icterana. Grass Wood. 

S. lacunana. Gill Beck Wood. 

P. cynosbana. Common from Bolton Woods to Grassington. 

B. lanceolana. Common, Silsden Moor. 

P. myrtillana. Common, Gill Beck Wood. 



LiMPRicHT : Notes on a few European Mosses. 



83 



C. ulicetana. Silsden Moor. 

E. maculosana. Near Bolton Bridge. 

C. stramineana. do. 

L. prselatella. Grass Wood. 

M. calthella. Bolton Woods. 

A. viridella. do. 

G. syringella. Grass Wood. 

In Coleoptera we noticed Melolontlta vulgaris in Grass Wood ; 
ApJiodius rufipesy Grassington ; Leistus fulvibarbis and Patrobus 
excavaiuSy near Bolton Bridge. 

Valley-street, Bradford, 



NOTES ON A FEW NEW EUROPEAN MOSSES. 

By Gustav Limpricht, 
(Translated), 

Orthotrichum subalpinum (n. sp.). — This I collected in the sub- 
alpine region of the Riesengebirges, about 1,250 metres high, growing 
on Sorbus Aucuparia, in July, 1871. Specimens agreeing in every, 
particular have been collected by Venturi in the Tyrol, and dis- 
tributed by him as Orthotr, stramineum foliis crispatisy Vent. 

The characteristics of 0. sub-alpinum may be thus summarised in the 
more prostrate growth of the small tufts, in the slender, crisped 
(when dry) leaves, with broadly rotundate points, in the very contracted 
cryptoporen stomata, in the color and shape of the inner peristome 
and cilia, and lastly, in the remarkable size and nature of the spores. 

Orthotrichum Rogeri Schimp. Syn., Ed. II., p. 332, is the only 
species which requires any notice in the consideration of 0. subalpinum. 
As, however, Dr. Carl Miiller, of Halle, the possessor of Bridel's 
original specimens, has repeatedly assured me that my plant in no 
degree is identical with 0, Rogeri Brid., I have preferred, in order not 
to further confuse matters, to publish it under a new name. 

The description of 0. Rogeri differs very much in the various bryo 
logical works, and in herbariums and exsiccate are to be found many 
specimens under this name which are mostly to be referred to 0, 
pallens Bruch., which may easily be distinguished by the pseudo- 
phaneroporen stomata. These forms of stomata deceived even the 
acute de Notaris, who in the Epil. d. BrioL, Ital, p. 311, judged them 



84 



The Naturalist. 



erroneously to be as in 0. pallens Bruch., and 0. microcarpum de 
Not., 1. c, p. 107, " Stomata normalia." 

Bryum (Cladodium) micans, (n. sp.,) discovered by the Rev. Chr. 
Kaurin, in damp peaty places, at tlie foot of the Olmberget mountain 
near Op'dal Dovrefield, Norway, in August, 1881, and again in 
October, 1882, communicated to me as Bryum arcHcum forma minor. 
This species comes near to the typical Bryum arcticum, Bryol, Eur. 
tab., 335 excl. fig. 1,1 b. and 6, but is, however, distinguished from 
it as follows : — The color of the tufts (of the leaves and mid-rib), is 
never reddish, the leaves are on their upper half, always entire, the 
nerve is only shortly excurrent, the capsule is regular (only curved in 
the neck), and polished, the teeth of the outer peristome are more 
deeply colored, broader and longer, and their cross-bands are more 
numerous, and formed as in Bryum pendulum^ the cells are smaller 
and in the neck-part very irregular, the papillae broader, and not so 
prominent, the spores are larger and almost might be called of an 
ochre-yellow color. It grows upon the naked turf. 

Bryum {Cladodium) arcuatum (n. sp.,) Synomyn. B. arcticum 
forma maxima. Kaurin in litt. Collected on damp shady rocks, near 
Opdal, Norway, July, 1882, by Rev. Chr. Kaurin. This species 
resembles in habit, Bryum uliyinosum, forma elongata Schimp., which 
Jenson has also in the Dovrefield collected and contributed to Raben- 
horst's Bryotheca Europ. sub., no. 274. 

Bryum (GladodiumJ Opdalense^ (n. sp.) Collected by Rev. Chr. 
Kaurin, in damp sandy places upon the banks of the Driva, near 
Opdal, Norway, and communicated to me as Bryum purpurescens, var. 

Bryum (Cladodium) autumnale^ (n. sp.) Collected by Rev. Chr. 
Kaurin, near Opdal, in damp sandy places, October, 1882, and re- 
peatedly sent to me as Bryum purpurescens^ Br. Euro. Bryum pur- 
purescem^ Bryol, Eur. tab., 336, and Bryum purpurescens, nr. 462 in 
Breutel Musci. frond, exsicc. from Labrador, agree, well with each 
other in every particular. From these, Bryum autumnale differs 
essentially ; it resembles very much in shape of leaf Bryum opdalense, 
and might perhaps possess the nearest relationship to Bryum Lindyreni^ 
of which I have only seen two imperfect stems. 

Bryum ( Eubryum ) sysphinctum (n. sp.)^ discovered by Rev. Chr. 
Kaurin, on the 7th August, 1882, with ripe capsules, in sandy places 
near Opdal, Norway, growing with Bryum opdalense. 

This plant comes far nearer to Bryum cirratum H. and H. than to 
Bryum bimum with which Kaurin joins it. The specimens which I 
possess from Schimper, Juratzka, Milde, and from the North German 



MosLEY : Where aee the Insects 1 85 



plains agree with each other pretty well, therefore I look upon this 
Norwegian plant not as a variety of Bryum cirratum^ but raise it 
provisionally as a distinct species. 

Bryum Archangelicum, Br. and Sch. I have recently been enabled to 
compare, through the kindness of the Rev. Chr. Kaurin, a small 
original specimen of Angstroem's, from the Royal Museum, Stock- 
holm, and I am now convinced that my Bryum tauriscorum (n. sp.) 
(Bryum inclimtum plano-operculatum Breidler in Sched ) belongs to it. 
The special characters for Bryum archangdicam are the flat operculum, 
the insignificant basilar membrane of the inner peristome, and the 
yellowish red-like dull spores, which last measure 0*0^7 mm., and are 
granulate. 



WHERE ARE THE INSECTS? 



By S. L. Mosley. 



This has been the cry of almost every Entomologist for the last two 
or three years, and the cry has been well founded, and has met with 
many answers. One person thinks that it is the wet spring, which 
has killed off all the lepidopterous larvae ; another thinks it is the 
mild winter; a third attributes it to the high winds, which have 
blown the larvae from the trees ; another thinks that it is due to the 
prevalence of ichneumon flies, but Dr. Capron tells us that ichneumon 
flies have been scarce too. Another thinks that there are too many 
collectors, a suggestion which alas, is only too true, but in rather a 
different sense from that in which the writer puts it. I dare say that 
there are few readers of this journal, who have not heard of such a 
thing as an insectivorous bird ; but did they ever consider what an 
insectivorous bird means % If it be true that a pair of blue tits, as 
has been calculated, destroy 600 caterpillars a day, during the 
breeding season ; if it be true that a flock of 300 rooks destroy 
162,900 crane flies per day, as I myself have borne witness, what must 
be the amount of destruction of insects carried on by the whole bird 
population of this country'? Let us try and make an approximate 
guess ! Previous to the passing of the Wild Birds' Protection Act, 
I have seen a flock of starlings in one of the midland counties, which 
contained from 50,000 to 100,000 ; take the lowest number and say 
50,000 for the whole county, and the same for each of the 40 counties 
of England — 2,000,000. Now each of the following birds are 



86 



The Naturalist. 



insectivorous during tlie breeding season, and according to my 
experience, are as common as the starling : — 



Keckoning these at tlie same rate as starlings, gives us 30,000,000. 
Now say that there are only half as many of each of the following 
birds : — 



9. Chaffinch. 

The latter 17 species would give us 17,000,000 individuals, which 
added to the previous numbers gives us 47,000,000. There are also 
many insectivorous birds which are fairly common, such as the wood 
wren, chifF-chaff, lesser white-throat, stonechat, blackcap, garden 
warbler, &c., &c., which I have not enumerated, but say in round 
numbers that there are 50,000,000 insectivorous birds in this 
country during May, June, and July. This will be 25,000,000 pairs ; 
reckon each pair to destroy as many caterpillars as the blue tits, 600 
a-day, during say one month, 30 x 600 = 18,000. Now, multiply 25 
millions by 18,000 and we get the amazing number of 450,000,000,000, 
the number of caterpillars destroyed by small birds during one month 
in the year. Has any reader of the Naturalist any idea what these 
numbers represent ] Let us try and form some idea. Say a pint 
measure would hold 500 caterpillars, that would give us 900,000,000 
pints, and about the same number of lbs. If we now reduce these lbs. 
to tons, we find that we arrive at the enormous sum total of 401,785 
tons. Let us simplify it still more, and say that they would fill over 
200 railway trains, each train having 20 waggons, holding 10 tons ! ! 
These figures are perfectly astounding, and I can scarcely credit my 
own calculations. Eemember that these calculations are but for one 
month out of twelve ; but if we allow the same numbers for the whole 
of the year, it is enough to turn the stomach of any thinking 



1. Hedge sparrow. 

2. Robin. 

3. Willow wren. 

4. Pied wagtail. 

5. Tree pipit. 

6. Meadow pipit. 

7. Skylark. 



8. Yellow hammer. 

9. House sparrow. 

10. Linnet. 

11. Swallow. 

12. Martin. 

13. Sand martin. 

14. Swift. 



1. Whinchat. 

2. Wheatear. 

3. Sedge warbler. 

4. Black cap. 

5. White throat. 

6. Blue tit. 

7. Ray's wagtail. 

8. Common bunting. 



10. Greenfinch. 

11. Twite. 

12. Wood pecker. 

13. Wren. 

14. Cuckoo. 

15. Nightjar. 

16. Partridge. 

17. Quail. 



Roberts : List of Shells of South Milford. 87 



Entomologist. Also bear in mind that these calculations are based 
upon a flock of birds seen before the passing of Bird Acts, and it is 
only fair to assume that they have considerably increased since then 
— perhaps doubled — and as I have gone as far as I am able in figures, 
I leave each one to reckon the rest for himself. 

These bird laws have interfered with the balance of nature, and 
made a blunder they cannot repair ; but I may return to this subject 
again. 

Beaumont Park, Huddersfield. 



LIST OF SHELLS 

COLLECTED OR OBSERVED ON JULY 2nd AND 9th, 

IN 

THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF SOUTH MILFORD. 
By George Boberts. 

SpJicerium laciistre. Common in the ponds about Milford Junction ; 
some on caddis cases. Many dead and open shells were lying on a 
dry bank, having been taken out of the water by mice or shrews. 

Pmdium nitidum. Common on caddis cases. 

BytJiinia tentaculata, 

Valvata piscinalis, Milford. 

Physa fontina lis, 

Liwoficea peregra and L. truncatula, 
Succinea putris. 
Vitrina pellucida. 

Zonites nitidulus^ Z. nilidus, and Z. pur us. 

Helix nemoralis. I collected altogether about 30 specimens, five, four, 
and one-banded, the prevailing colours being various shades of red, 
which is the colour of the soil in the district, but a few were 
yellow. They occur generally, but few together, mostly on the 
nettles in the hedges, and some on the top of the hedges. One 
specimen of Nemoralis has the lip white. Near Milford I noticed 
a snail-stone on which about half-a-dozen neinoralis had been broken 
by a thrush. There were no fragments of Cantiana shells, though 
the latter was abundant in the hedge close by. Amongst the few I 
picked up there are several of the major form with depressed spire, 
one fine trochiform specimen with one band, and one or two 
entirely destitute of epidermis. 



88 



The Naturalist. 



H, arhustorum. Near Fairburn, on nettles which had been mowed, in 
company with Cantiaua riifescens, and variety hyhrida of Nemoralis. 

H, cantiana. Abundant in all the hedges, both moist and dry, in all 
stages of growth. Apparently the commonest of the Helices. 

H, ritfescens. Frequent. 

//. pulcJiella. On a wall near Milford. 

K, Jiispida. Common ; many greyish in colour and very hispid, 
apparently intermediate between Msplda and sericea. A few are 
rufous, and destitute of hairs. 
//. Jiispida, var. nana. 
H. caper at a, 

H. ericetorum.. On a high bank at Newton lime quarry. All the 
adult shells I saw were dead ; the young were suspended beneath 
blades of grass. 

H, rotundata. 

Pupa marginata, 

Clausilia rugosa, 

Zua liihrica. 

Z. lvJ)rica. var. lubricoides. 

I saw no Relix liortensiB, . and H. aspersa seems to be confined to 
gardens and old walls near houses. The soil here is red, lying on 
red sand or clay. 

Lofthouse, Wakefield. 



gatnfan for #dokr. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall, 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
' TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


EuDDEESFiELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

4-67 


18 


31-85 


*-27-25 


24 


0-67 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


6-11 


17 


40-73 


40-44 


25 


1-02 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


2-59 


25 


25-21 


t 20-77 


3 


0-59 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


2-96 


13 


29-48 


^29 -08 


17 


0-40 


Barnsley ... (T. Lister) ... 


350 


3-35 


21 


28-41 


27-10 


17 


0-69 


Ingbirchworth (do.) 


853 


4-73 


17 


40-60 


36-42 


17 


0-82 


Went WORTH Castle (do.)... 


520 


3-97 


17 


30-86 


27-81 


17 


0-71 


GooLE ... (J. Harrison) ... 


25 


3-83 


21 


24-30 


26-77 


3 


0-64 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Law ton) 


10 


4.35 


20 


18-85 


23-20 


1 


1-11 



Scarborough Rainfall for October, 3*47 : 0-93 above average. — A. Rowntree. 
* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. *}' Average of 29 years, 1853-62 1865-83. 
J Average of 14 y a's, 1870-83. 



Regulns cristatus at Elland. — This morning, during the bright sun- 
shine, whilst walking in Elland town-fields, I observed a flock of about a 
dozen, more or less, of the goldcrest (Regnlus cristatus), hovering under 
the decaying leaves of the sycamore, picking oflf a kind of green fly, or 
plant louse which were adhering to the under side. They were very 
active, similar in their motion to titmice, and uttering a low note which 
may be spelt zit, zit." Mr. Cunningham writes to the Halifax Courier 
that he also saw a flock (no doubt the same) in the People's Park. I 
heard the redwing on the 7th inst. — C. C. Hanson, West Yale, Oct. 
21st, 1883. 

Goldfinches near* Bingley. — As I was coming over Hope-hill (960 
feet^, with a friend on Nov. 11, a party of goldfinches flew close past us. 
I had just remarked that some of the thistle-heads were drilled," but 
the droppings I thought indicated that it was the work of birds which 
were superior in size to the goldfinch. It is, I believe, just thirteen years 
this November since I saw any about this locality. — E. P. P. Butterfield. 

Late Mackerel and Herring on Yorkshire Coast. — I think it is 
worth recording how extremely late mackerel and herring have been 
taken, this autumn, ofi" the Yorkshire coast. The former were exposed 
for sale, in quantit}^, in the Hull shops, freshly caught in Bridlington 
bay, down to the 20th October. Herrings are still ofiering in the shops 
to-day, taken at the same place. The mildness of the weather no doubt 
explains it. — N. F. Dobree, Beverley, 14th Nov., 1883. 

Entomological Notes from Bingley. — Last week I received a few 
insects (of the names of which I had some doubt) from Mr. Barrett, 
which I had sent him for determination ; and although one or two are 
not in such good condition, he says they maybe safely named as follows : 
Scoparia atomalis, S. conspicualis, S. perterana, P. sordidana, P. semi- 
fnscana — all of which are additions to the local lepidoptera of this 
district ; S. atomalis, of which I sent him two specimens I took on 
Blaokhills in July. There were scores of Scoparice flying about at the 
same time as I took these two, but whether they were all of this species 
(if it be a species) I cannot say. I called them amhignalis when I took 
them, and I confess I am puzzled with them now. Conspicualis I thought 
was a small ctmhralis, with which I had had it placed. It was taken, I 
believe, by my brother last year in the neighbourhood. I have another, 
however, which I have taken in the district this year — S. perterana. I 
picked it out from amongst some suhjectana in the neighbourhood of 
Blackhills. Mr. Firth showed me an insect yesterday, which I take to 
be this species ; he took it in Shipley Glen this year. P. sordidana and 
semifuscana 1 beat from alder trees about a marshy piece of ground in the 
park adjoining Bingley Wood on the 22nd September last. On the 3rd 
instant I was on Harden Moor, and E. gelatella was very abundant — nay. 



90 



The Naturalist. 



actually swarmed. They arose at every step, and there must have bee 
thousands.— E. P. P. Butterfield, Wilsden, Nov. 12th, 1883. 

Entomological Notes. — Recently I bred a fine series of Pterophorus 
zopliodactylus {Loewii), from larvse sent from near Dorchester, found 
feeding on flowers of Brythrcea centaurea ; and some beautiful Gymnan- 
cycla canella from larvse sent to me last year by the Rev. E. N. Bloom- 
field, M.A., found on Salsola Kali at Camber, near Rye. I have also 
added to my collection several Eupithecia pygm-ceata and Pterophonis 
teucrii, taken near King's Lynn by Mr. E. A. Atmore during the past 
year. Amongst some insects sent me to name from Scotland by Mr. Jas. 
Hinchliffe, of Alva, was a fine example of the variety angelicata of 
Eupithecia alhipunctata, a form which seems previously to have been 
noticed only in Yorkshire and Staffordshire. A still more interesting find 
is that of Acronycta myricce in Ireland. Mr. F. De V. Kane sent me for 
determination a specimen bred from a pupa he found on the face of a 
rock on a wild exposed headland, at Galley Head, a most unusual 
situation, and where Mr. De V. Kane says the larva could not have fed 
on Myrica gale, but probably on close-shaven thrift. He also turned up 
Becatera serena and Neiiria saponarice in Ireland, and DianthcEcia 
ccesia in three different localities there. It is worthy of record, too, that 
the still rare Hydrilla palustris was taken at Wicken Fen again this 
year. — G. T. Porritt. 

Washburndale Shells. — I wish to add to the list of shells taken on 
the occasion of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union excursion on the 6th 
August, which is printed on -p. 40 of this volume — the name of Limncea 
auricularia, of which I took a single specimen at the upper, or Blubber- 
houses end of Fewston reservoir, where no doubt it may be regarded as 
being common. — Wm. Denison Roebuck, Sunny Bank, Leeds, Nov. 
9th, 1883. 

Note on Testacella. — My name having been mentioned by Mr. 
Roebuck as to the occurrence of Testacella at this place, I may state that, 
so far as I remember, my shells resembled haliotidea, but I think it likely 
they were scutuhim after all. I am sorry I have no means of clearing up 
the point, as I have no specimens. I was much surprised when I first 
found the shell here some seven or eight years since, in Padman's 
nursery. I have only seen two or three specimens within that time, but 
think there are many more, and they only require looking for. They 
probably come with flowering plants, or ferns, from the south or from 
France, being imported in the soil of plant-pots, either in the egg or in 
the mature form. All the specimens I saw could be traced to the 
nursery, and I cannot think they are natives here. Possiblj^ our friend 
Mr. Butterell's shell at Beverley may have a similar history. I never 
heard that anybody had noticed it for Yorkshire until I communicated 
with Messrs. Taylor and Roebuck, several years ago. There is no reason 
why this should be its most northerly appearance. I presume it might be 



Repotits of Societies. 



91 



found in Aberdeen under similar conditions to those named. Perhaps 
some of our friends may examine a few nurseries, particularly the soil 
and pots and crocks, when plants are being re-potted. — John Emmett, 
Boston Spa, Nov. 21st, 1883. 

Tromhidium phalangii AT GouBAL^ Scar. — Upon the occasion of the 
visit of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union to Malham, on Sept. 1st last, 
I found a specimen of the harvest spider (Phalangium), covered with the 
parasite Tromhidium phalangii, about half way up the ravine where the 
stream comes down at Gordale Scar. This may perhaps be worth 
noticing. — George W. Oldfield, Harrogate, JSTov. 1st, 1883. 



Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Oct. 2nd, the president 
in the chair. — Mr. Illingworth exhibited a specimen of the vapourer 
moth (0. antiqua), which he captured in front of the British Museum ; 
also a cluster of eggs of the same species, taken at Camberwell Green. 
Mr. Terry sent a box of insects taken at Witherslack, among which were 
Hesperia sylvanuSy Alexis, G. Davus, Carsia imhutata, H. auroraria, 
Mixodia Schidzianay &c. Mr. Wood described a visit to Edinburgh, and 
gave a geological description of Arthur's Seat. He then read an 
interesting paper on the geological formation of the Bradford district, 
and illustrated it with a number of fossils collected in the vicinity of 
Bradford. Mr. West exhibited a specimen of Cuscuta epithymum from 
Chislehurst, found on gorse and heather, and also a large number of 
drawings of various species of algae. 

Meeting Oct. 16th, the president in the chair. — Mr. Kershaw exhibited 
a specimen of the long-eared bat {Plecotns auritus from Essex ; Mr. 
Carter a small box of insects containing C. geniculellvs, M. furuncula, 
and A. gilmria, from the South of England. Mr. Soppitt reported 
having seen Vanessa cardui at Saltaire, and that Mr. Butterfield had 
captured one at Wilsden. He also gave an interesting account of a 
fungus foray he had attended at Hereford, which extended over four 
days, and exhibited specimens of Helvella laeunosa from Heaton Woods, 
Craterella cornucopoides, Strohilomyces strohilaceiis, and Caiitherellus 
cinereus, from Ludlow. Mr. Riley exhibited a box of insects from 
Glasgow, among which were D. fagella, F. atomaria, and G. graminis ; 
he also read an interesting paper on Entomology," illustrating it with a 
number of specimens of butterflies and moths. Mr. West showed 
specimens of alpine plants, Astrantia major, Smilacina hifolia, Aristilochia 
clematitis, and Lloydia serotina, the last-named from Snowdon ; also a 
number of seaweeds from Cornwall, Wales, &c. — John Eastwood, Sec. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting, Oct. 
29th, the president, Mr. S. J. Capper, in the chair. — A paper was read 
by Mr. Henry Capper on '^Darwinism and Beauty." After reviewing 
Dr. Darwin's theory of the development of beauty through the agency of 



92 



The Na^turalist. 



sexual selection, he pointed out that although this theory threw much 
light upon the subject, it also left much unexplained ; for instance, why 
the colours and markings produced should be of a most refined type, or 
why beauty should exist throughout nature. They had, therefore, to 
look for something beyond ; and since man's intellect was capable of 
appreciating, and to some extent, imitating this beauty, and since it was 
highly improbable that it had been created solely for his gratification, 
they were irresistibly led to the conclusion that it was the product of an 
intellect alike in kind, but immeasurably grander than man's own. The 
paper led to an animated and interesting discussion. Mr, F. M, Pierce 
exhibited a specimen of Lahidura gigantea, taken in his office, Tithebarn- 
street, Liverpool ; and Mr. von Sobbe and Mr. Wilding some recently 
captured and bred lepidoptera. 

Manchester Chyptogamic Society. — Monthly meeting, September. 
Dr. Carrington presided, and reported some of the proceedings of the 
Biological Section of the British Association during its late meeting at 
Southport. The president also distributed a few specimens of the 
characteristic mosses of Southport, which he had collected during his 
visit. Mr. Wm. West, of Bradford, sent a number of mounted slides of 
British marine and fresh-water algse for exhibition, and also a number of 
beautifully executed tracings of figures of cryptogamic plants, which were 
much admired for the skill and patience required for their delineation. 
Mr. W. H. Pearson exhibited a new British moss, Tortula palndosa, 
which had been sent by Mr. Davis, of Brighton. The specimen had 
been collected by Mr. W. Mullen in the Clydach valley, Abergavenny, 
in August last. Mr. Pearson also exhibited the rare British hepatic, 
Dumortiera irriqua, collected in East Sussex by the Pev. E. N. Bloom- 
field ; Mr. George Burgess, of Prestwich, exhibited a number of mosses 
from the neighbourhood of Malham. — T. Pogers, Hon. Sec. 

York and District Field Naturalists' Society. — Meeting October 
10th, Mr. G. C. Dennis in the chair. — The chairman exhibited the 
following insects, taken by himself at Bishop's Wood, near Selby : — 
JS onagri a fulva, Teras caudana, a long series of Fcedisca ophtlialmicana 
P. sordidana, and PteropJioms trigonodactyhis ; the hon. sec. (Mr. Prest) 
a fine series of Sesia chrysidiformis, Tephrosia extensaria, Macaria notata, 
JEupithecia satyrata, Cidaria silaceata, Psyche reticella^ A7iesychia funerella 
and decemguttella, and the rare tortrix Ephippiplwra nigricostana. Mr. 
Wilkinson brought for exhibition a fine collection of well-mounted 
specimens of rare plants, most of them collected by himself during the 
present season : — Geranium sangnineum, G. luciduin, collected at Mal- 
ham ; G. rotnndifolium from Somerset ; G. sylvaticmn (Teesdale), G, 
striatum (Scarborough), G. pratense, G. pnsillnm, G. molle, G. dissectnm, 
G. Rohertiamim, G. colnmhinumy G. pyrenaicvm, collected near York. 
Mr. Prest, on behalf of his son, Mr. C. S. Prest, exhibited the jawbone 
of the Indian shark, and the saw of a large sawfish, brought by him from 
the East Indian coast. — W. Prest, Hon. Sec. 



THE SEA BIRDS AT FLAMBOROUGH. 



By John Cordeaux, M.B.O. CJ., 
President of the Vetebrate Section Y.N.U., 1883. 

By far the most plentiful of the various tenants on the cliffs we have 
visited to-day is the common guillemot ; the allied variety known as 
the ringed guillemot, Vt'ici lacrytnans^ is not common. Out of eight 
guillemots clustered together on a ledge near the upper part of the 
cliff at Speeton, six were the common species, and two were ringed 
guillemots — but this was quite an exceptional circumstance. Guille- 
mots return with remarkable regularity to their nesting quarters, 
visiting the neighbourhood soon after Christmas, and may be seen off 
Flamborough in large numbers in the early spring. They congregate 
at this cliff in April, and commence laying in May ; only one egg is 
laid on the bare cliff, and the cliff climbers allege that if this is taken, 
and repeated, the same' bird will go on till she has laid nine or ten 
eggs. This, however, is directly contrary to the observations of Mr. 
George MacLachlan, formerly the lighthouse keeper at Barra Head, 
and one of our most careful observers on the West Coast of Scotland. 
He states that if the first egg is taken, a second is laid, and then a 
third; if this is taken the bird lays no more that season. If left 
undisturbed the guillemot will return year by year exactly to the same 
spot. If the eggs are taken, the guillemots shift their ground, it may 
be only to the next ledge, and become much shyer. Mr. MacLachlan 
sprinkled the birds on a certain ledge with red paint, and the birds on 
a continuation of the same ledge with blue paint. He then went 
down and took the eggs, and found that the blue and red spotted 
birds had changed places with each other. jSTormally only one egg is 
laid in the season. The guillemots know their own eggs, and if one is 
interchanged during the absence of the female, she will shift it back 
with her feet. Incubation is performed in an upright position ; the 
young is hatched in 21 to 24 days, and after remaining for about 
three weeks on the cliff, where it is fed both by the male and female, 
it is carried down to the sea on the back of the parent The Flam- 
borough boatman states that this is done at high water, when there is 
a considerable depth at the base of the cliff, and more frequently in 
the quiet of the evening. Usually the young bird falls off before 
reaching the sea, or is thrown off by the parent bird. At Barra Head 
Mr. MacLachlan states, the young bird is grasped by the wing, near 
the shoulder, and not carried, as a rule, on the back of the parent. 
N.S., Vol. ix. Jan., 1884. 



91 



The Naturalist. 



The male bird does not assist in incubation, nor does he feed the 
hen when sitting. If the yoang bird is hatched, and the female killed, 
he will, however, continue to bring up the nestlings. 

There are now three sets of cliff-climbers who obtain their livelihood 
during the season by plundering the sea-fowl on these cliffs. Many 
of the eggs find their way to the egg collectors and curitjsity shops, 
some are eaten and used in cookery ; and it is said torn are sent to 
Leeds, where they are used (the albumen) in the process of manu- 
facturing patent leather. This wholesale destruction is much to be 
regretted. No eggs should be taken after the first of June. The 
w^eight of a full sized guillemot is about 24oz., the egg between three 
and fonr. 

Scattered about, either singly or in small communities on the cliffs, 
are numerous razorbills. Their habits are much the same as the guille- 
mot ; they lay one egg, either on the ledge or cleft in the cliff. The 
young bird is also carried down to the sea by the parent birds. Both 
the male and the female bird assist in incubation. Mr. Edward 
McCarron, the light-keeper on the Traraght Rock, off the Blasket 
Island, Tralee, states in his report for 1882-83, Irish Stations — ^' The 
parent birds relieve each other while hatching. I actually saw a 
razorbill come up to another which was on the egg, peck it, when off 
it went, and the new comer took its place. The razorbill is a more 
active bird on the wing than the guillemot." 

Of puffins there are large numbers on these cliffs. They lay one egg„ 
which is, as a rule, placed in some hollow or crevice in the rock. 
Sometimes several puffins may be found in one hole ; both the cock 
and hen sit alternately. When the young is hatched, it is fed by the 
parents until such time as it is able to fly down to the water. The 
old birds carry sprats, syle, and sand-eels in their beak up to the rock ; 
they hold them dangling on each side of the bill, suspended like a grey 
fringe or beard. A puffin will thus carry easily from 20 to 30 small 
fish or eels. They are grasped between the nose and eyes^ and held 
much in the same manner as when a knife is struck into an apple. 
Even when the puffin is shot they do not fall out, but remain firmly 
attached to the sides af the beak. I have frequently seen puffins fishing 
for prey at great distances from their nesting quarter. At Barra Head 
it is said to go fifty miles for its food ; the necessity therefore, of 
carrying a considerable supply at once becomes apparent. 

The kittiwake nests in some numbers on the Bempton cliffs. The 
nest is a slight cavity of mud and sea-weed beaten and trampled 
together, lined with finer materials, as dry grass, and often placed on 
such a narrow ledge as to leave scarce room for the bird to turn 



CoRDEAux : The Sea Birds at Flamborough. 



95 



round. Three eggs are laid. The young birds, when they first 
appear at sea — conspicuous by the black spots on the side of the head 
— are called " mackerel birds," because they usually appear at sea vrith 
their parents at the time these fish are approaching the coast in 
August. 

Other sea-birds seen during the excursion were a cormorant and a 
few herring gulls. The herring gull nests in considerable numbers on 
the cliffs north of Filey Brigg — a locality where two pairs of cormor- 
ants are nesting this year, also several rockdoves. 

A large flock of lapwing were seen in the fields above Speeton, 
showing that these birds had already congregated. 

Wheatears, meadow pipits, and pied wagtail. 

Had time permitted, I should like to have told you something 
about the migration of birds on to the Yorkshire coast in the autumn 
of 1882, especially of that great flight of goldcrests, one wing of which 
touched the Faroes and the other crossed the Channel Islands — a 
migration which, commencing in August and continued through 
September, rose to its height in October, and gradually decreasing to 
November — altogether over 92 days. 

Again, of that large flight of jays which, early in October, took 
three days to pass Heligoland, travelling from E to W in a strong 
south-easterly gale. 

And, scarcely less wonderful, of the immense flights of the common 
hedge-sparrow, which, passing Heligoland early in October, occurred 
at the same period in such large numbers in Holderness and North 
East Lincolnshire. 

May I be permitted to trust, however, that an opportunity may be 
given us of meeting together at some central place, as Leeds, during 
the winter, when we may have leisure to enter more fully into the 
details of the various excursions made by the Union during the year, 
and the general results to be derived therefrom. 

[The above Notes are the substance of the remarks made by Mr. Cordeaux 
while presiding over the Filey meeting (June Uth, 1883) of the Y.N.U.] 



NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 

( Continued.) 
By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

A POOR benighted lunatic, once upon a time/' was run in by a 
benighted policeman, charged with the possession of a 'ighly 
dangerous hincubation, yer honner." P.C.'s potations of three-star 



The Naturalist. 



cognac dimmed liis recollection of Englisli grammar. I suppose 
incubus was the word intended. Now, I also plead guilty to this soft 
impeachment — not the brandy, but the incubus. It must be cast off. 
I have tried to limn -a cheerful picture, to cull from Nature's bouquet 
a few bright flowers, to speak fair for all I've seen and heard. 
Have I not advanced the Diptera to a front position, and solemnly 
published their order— grand 1 1 have ! In token thereof I hereby 
attach my mark, X. Henceforth must I be just. I spoke of Nature : 
I speak on Gnat-ure. Bombylius and Andrax^ ye may number 
amongst ye the fairest of all created fairies ; atomic Culex and blue- 
blooded Daddy Longlegs,* ye may lay claim to veneration : but I 
love ye not — and wherefore ? Because of yours ! Are ye not allied 
to man's chief est foes — the mosquitoes % against whom Burns might 
have thundered — 

• Ye hypocrites ! are these your pranks, 
To murder men, and gie God thanks V 

and screamed aloud in very sleepless restlessness — 

For shame ! gie o'er — proceed no further — 
God won't accept your thanks for murther." 

The quality of mercy is not strained, excepting towards mosquitoes 
and house-flies. f I count intolerable heat by day and night, aching 
bones and tired limbs, as naught ; but the stings and buzzes of imps 
of darkness and damp ticklings of moonlight imps, as intolerable, 
i//2y{?ardonable, fiendish. I am satisfied with the theory of ^' use in all 
created beings," but draw the line at mosquitoes and house flies, 
excusably mollifying outraged feelings in the notion that their breed 
has deteriorated whilst ours progressed ; they were created check- 
mates to antediluvian apes, and by judicious C?) natural selection 
transferred their aff'ections to culminating humankind. Dr. Spencer 
Cobbold, the renowned helminthologist, in his Filarian theory, 
champions John Chinaman. Emigration has just presented us a few 
samples of our pigtailed brethren. Mosquitoes will have their blood. 
Exchange is no robbery ! Personal pain is a grand charity-syphon, 
and occasionally, when I have been compelled to jump from my couch 
irritated beyond expression, abstraction guiding my footsteps towards 
the window, I have gazed upon the miserable forms of tick-troubled, 
weather-beaten, well-whipped oxen, remembering also the Tsetse-ills, 
etcetera, which their race is heir to, — and back to bed I turn, contented 
with my lot, yet full of sadness. Verily Diptera is a good name, only 



* Not T. oleracea. 



t Colonists from the old country. 



Bairstow . Natural History Notes from South Africa. 97 

equalled by Dip-terror. Vale mosquitoes ! Vale house-flies ! Ye 
cannot prove malicious. It is too late, my friends : the winter draweth 
nigh ! 

My researches among the Orthoptera in schoolboy's happy home 
were decidedly acute, if somewhat exclusive. They were nearly 
confined to the house cricket and cockroach. I never progressed much 
with No. 1 ; superstition, dread of ill luck, barred the way, and I 
studied economy at long ranges. But No. 2 was most ardently 
pursued. It is not unlikely that the flattened intestines of slippered 
Blattas are this day adhering to certain wall papers in a certain home- 
stead. An itinerant vermin-killer, quite expert in the noble art of 
catching cockroaches and killing them against the palms of his hands, 
was wont to pay periodical calls at our house for purposes of pest 
extermination. Unfortunately he fell in love with the kitchen-maid — 
a damsel of forty-five years — who rejected him, after mature delibera- 
tion. He wooed, popped, and lost, notwithstanding a fair bank 
balance to his credit, and increasing trade returns. Moral : cock- 
roaches were evidently fairly prolific to remunerate a hawking 
executioner. However Mr. Smouser dropped visiting us, and my 
researches continued. Now in this country (O blissful fact !) although 
I am minus 2 re Diptera, I am plus 1 re Orthoptera. I am not bothered 
by cockroaches, and a solitary house cricket — bless his pertinacious 
windpipe ! — does duty for a pet canary. Apparently the crickets in 
South Africa domineer over cockroaches as domestic pets. This is 
easily explained (1) because we have a scarcity of ancient tenements ; 
(2) cement and plaster are in great demand for building material, and 
crickets are partial to semi-damp abodes. But I conceive it is with 
insects as 'tis with Kafirs — civilization means demoralization. My 
sweet songster becomes a bore. He takes advantage of board and 
lodging. I concede the kitchen to him — he adopts the sitting-room. 
Briefly, he waxes fat and impudent. Kindness kills good manners. 
A Kafir of Kaffraria is a noble animal ; a cricket of the Veldt is a fine 
old fellow. 

Walking in the land of Orthoptera, or Screechdom, will amply 
repay an observant tourist. The air reverberates in stridulatory 
music, and beneath each stone there lies concealed a patron cockroach 
or protean relative. It may be caprice which suggests to my mind the 
thought that insects replace our birds as songsters ; and granting their 
melodies are a trifle monotonous, they are welcome neighbours, and I 
bear them no ill-will. Of Cursoria ih^M ant idee are most interesting, 
whilst the largest species are most commonly met with. Nothing can 



98 



The Na^turalist. 



exceed the extreme delicacy and variableness of tint exhibited by some of 
the lovely green gods, who practically are not so green as they look. They 
revel amongst our garden creepers, particularly convolvulaceous plants. 
When I study the character of a god at home, I am forcibly reminded of the 
street-corner pharisees, " watching and prey'mg " — outwardly all that is 
sublime, the quintessence of sincerity ; inwardly — third-class sinners. 
And the goddess is not a whit purer-minded than her lord, but 
exemplifies a mournfully suspicious combination of Venus and 
Charybdis. See the beautiful creature modestly hiding in the recesses 
of her leafy home ! See the implacable gluttoness gripping the feeble 
captive, and ravenously devouring it in greedy haste ! 

The Mantidce excel in the noble art of buffoonery, substituting 
facial for verbal expressions. It may be that they can actually wink, 
for of all existant creatures I never met a funnier-looking ungodly god 
than the so-called Hottentot.* This remarkable external gift is but 
an index to one more potent and internal — advanced instinct — I had 
almost said wisdom. What attitudinarians they are 1 swaying to and 
fro on their legs as if each position assumed gave them discomfort ; as 
if every limb was a separate and distinct member acting independently 
of the rest. How craftily they wag their heads ! how clerically 
spread out their arms ! how tenaciously enclose their fists 1 1 place 
one on the table and pretend to rap it with my finger. The god, 
uncertain if the blow shall fall, sJir'mks back upon its legs in a most 
arrogant manner, signifying " I won't move unless I wish." I have 
heard of taming gods, and am persuaded from personal experience 
that the notion is not unreasonable. Vital durability favors experi- 
ments. 

Many species of FJi^mm occur in the Colony. Mole-crickets fiy 
over the garden wall " and make a rush with their trowel-legs at 
our lamps, and terrify the inmates of our rooms. A pretty green 
£uJieppiger (?) frequents and mimics willow-leaves. It has a peculiarly- 
shaped convex thorax, and produces a shrill sound with its wings. 
These, in closing together, clasp suddenly like a spring ; hence the 
sound. The apparatus may be examined and proved after the insect 
is killed. Friend Koebuck, if he sees my paper, will expect a word or 
two about locust swarms. Friend Roebuck will be disappointed. I 
can only recount with accuracy those things which I have seen, 
There are colonists, old stagers, who remember such occurrences, but 
their differences of opinion and relation are material. History some- 
times is another term for dogmatism, masking too, x'^erversion and 

t Jlottentot or Malay God — an accepted vulvar name throughout the Colony, 



Baihstow : Natural History Notes from South Africa. 99 



Iiap-hazard surmise, so tliat to quote particularly from hearsay- 
devolves a medley encumbrance. Apart from swarms, I quickly 
observed a peculiarity of locust domestic life. I lift the veil of 
privacy and perceive that some species pair in their pupal stage. 
There is another problem I should very much like in solution. When 
I first left England * for this country I used to enjoy an early prome- 
nade on deck. A few days past Madeira on the 10th of September, 
1880. in lat. 21° 20", long. 17" 56", a phenomenon appeared. Sud- 
denly there swarmed aft an immense number of insects — Lepidoptera 
— one specimen only, a locust, excepted. I netted or boxed many 
species, chloroformed them with the Doctor's assistance, and trans- 
ferred to a safe abode, as I vainly imagined. On n earing Cape Town, 
to my utter annoyance a colony of vile little carnivorous pests had 
taken possession, and cleared nearly every treasure, leaving only legs 
and debris of their victims to tell the tale. At the S. A. museum I 
identified a splendid Sphinx^ taken at rest on the poop, as Chcerocardpa 
idricus. Very curiously the Rev. Mr. Shaw, of Madagascar (a fellow 
passenger) recognised one or two insects which occui-red on that 
island. A few butterflies and gaily-coloured birds were fluttering 
about the rigging in a state of exhaustion, but all the moths I picked 
up, when I first saw them were dormant. 

Now, was there any selection of kinsmen, or essential partisans, 
any pre-arrangement of spontaneous migration 1 Why, then select a 
solitary locust 1 What outside agency impelled the flight of creatures 
from different localities 1 Or if such a multidude of colonising insects 
were wandering aimlessly, or by compulsory ejectment, or a precon- 
certed signal, for their native shore, and met casually or purposely, or 
neither, within the limited area of a ship's deck ; what proportions of 
vastness or meagreness did the swarm assume at starting? Our 
passengers remarked the visiting moths cleared next day as fitfully as 
they appeared. Ah ! ah ! a collector was aboard. I have long and 
firmly believed that local weather diaries compared together will aid us 
in determining causes of insect swarms quite as efficiently as local 
" presence " records. Winds sweep existences from land to water : 
why not from land, across water, to land ?| The Blosop {Pueumora) 

* s s. Balmoral Castle, Capt. J. Winchester. 

t On dit. — A tremendous swarm of ca^terpillars invaded Port Elizabeth some 
years ago, causing much annoyance to the inhabitants. A land wind swept them 
into the ocean. I have often picked up insects on the sea-beach complete 
strangers to me, although I am willing to confess these may may have been 
blown frem the bush, 'end formerly escaped notice There are frequent reports 
from up-country of processionary larval invasions. Some of them only dis* 
appeared when travelling* into rivers (I) 



100 



The Naturalist. 



has been well blown up by popular writers, so I need not dilate upon 
it. A remarkable and apterous locust, Ketrodes pupa,'\ which presents, 
on account of numerous spines, a most formidable front to the enemy, 
is sure to attract a stranger's attention. 

(To he continued.) 



CAPTURES OF LEPIDOPTERA IN THE BINGLEY 
DISTRICT IN 1883. 

By E. p. p. Butterfield. 

S, conspicualis. In looking over the various species of Scoparice 
taken in this district this season, I find I have one S. conspicualis, but 
do not remember the exact locality where I got it. 
A. gerningana. Common on Blackhills.— I found this species quite 

plentiful near the Shooting house on Harden Moor. 
P. mixtana. Scarce on Harden Moor. 

P. compc^raiia. Common, Beckfoot ; and also Nab Wood, near 
Saltaire. 

P. Schalleriana. Not common. 

P. Caledoniana. Common, Harden Moor ; abundant, Eombold^s 
Moor ; ^ and I also saw it at the foot of Ingleborough, in August. 

P. hastiana, I am not quite sure that there was not an error in 
recording this species for this locality. I took a few above Morton 
on the Moor, last September, and sent one of them to Mr. Barrett 
to name ; he named it hastiana^ but it was much worn, and I now 
think it might have been Caledoniana. 

jD. Lceflingiana. One taken on Shipley Glen, by Mr. John Firth. — 
I have not seen this species in the immediate neighbourhood. 

Z). Forskaleana. One taken by my brother at Apperley Bridge, and 
another by myself at Shipley Glen, are all that I know of in this 
district. 

A . Conwayana. Only near Harden Beck. 

P. LecJieana, Scarce, Bingley Wood. 

P. picana. Not uncommon on Blackhills. 

P. prcelongana. Only once in a wood near Shipley Glen. 

P. sauciana. Common, Blackhills ; abundant in Harden Clough. 

My brother also saw it on Pendle Hill last August. 
S, dealhana. Common, Cottingley Wood. 
C politana. Common, Harden Moor and Barden. 



t Authority — Trimeu. 



BUTTERFIELD : LePIDOPTEEA OF THE BiNGLEY DISTRICT. 101 



C. favillaceana. Common, Bingley Wood. 

P. myrtlllam. Abundant about vaccmium, Blackbills and Barden. 
G. campoliliana. Very common about sallows at Beck foot, Bingley. 
G, geminana. Swarms about bilberry at Blackhills and Harden 
Clough. 

P. opthalmicam. Taken in a wood near Sbipley Glen by Mr. Firth. 

F. occultana. Common on fir on Blackhills, 

Fj. bhnaculana. Abundant, Blackhills. 

F. circiana. Only one taken in this district. 

F, PJlugiana. Common at Shipley Glen j not so common at Wilsden. 

F. Bi'unnicliiama. Common near this village and Cottingley Moor. 

P. monticolana. Common on Harden Moor. This was the com- 
monest insect I saw at the foot of the western slope of 
Ingleborough. I also took one by an old wall-side near this 
village. 

8, coniferana. I took one on fir on Blackhills about August. 

D, Jierhosana. One taken by my brother at Grassington ; he also 
brought me another from an old wall side close to the village. 
I afterwards took it commonly at the same place. 

O. cana. Scarce ; only one taken. 

F, nana. Scarce, in Hirst Wood, near Saltaire. 

F. atricapitana. Scarce, Blackhills. 

F. maculomna. One near Bolton Bridge. 

F. angudana. Common, Harden Moor and Blackhills. 

0. stramineana. Common at Beckfoot and Bolton Bridge. 

A. osseana. At Wilsden j abundant, Grassington. 

F. gelatella. Abundant, Blackhills. 

S, emortuella. Very common, West Beckfield, near Cottingley. 

T, fulvimitrella, I took another of this beautiful insect on an alder 

tree near Bingley Wood last June. 
R pralaiella,. One at Wilsden, and at Grassington. 
M. tinimaculella. One taken by Mr. Firth, Shipley Glen. 
F. porrectella. Common, Wilsden. 

H, seqiiella, I have bred one or two from pupae taken from ash in 

Bingley Wood. 
H, nemorella. Not uncommon about Wilsden. 
jff. harpella. Common. 
P, quercella. Not scarce, Bingley Wood. 
A, nitidella. Common, Goit Stock. 
A, Aftdereggiella. Wilsden. 
A, Goedartella. Cottingley Wood. 



Where are the Insects Mr. Mosley has put a question which 
deserves the attention of every naturalist — using that word in its widest 
acceptation ; but I take leave to doubt whether its true answer is in 
accordance with his inference — namely, that the scarcity of insects during 
the past year is due to recent legislation in regard to birds. I abstain 
from criticizinsj Mr. Mosley 's estimate of the bird-population of England, 
beyond giving my opinion that it is exaggerated ; but one thing to me is 
obvious. No Act of Parliament can make a cup that is full hold any 
more, and no Act of Parliament can have made birds with which this 
country was already fully stocked more numerous than before. JSTow this 
was the case with nearly all the species Mr. Mosley names, and 
accordingly on those species recent legislation has had no effect whatever. 
They are species that without exception have never been subjected to 
direct and continued persecution that could have thinned their num^bers, 
because it is only persecution of that kind at the breeding season that has 
such an effect. Again, it is notorious that in the numbers of our com- 
monest birds, such as those named by Mr. Mosley and several more, there 
has been within the last few years a very great diminution. It is 
perfectly clear to me that the excessive severity of several winters in 
succession, and, still more, the inclemency of two springs, destroyed the 
individuals of some species of birds to such an extent as had not been 
known for many years — certainly not within my memory. Whether these 
exceptional seasons have produced the scarcity of insects 1 do not pretend 
to say. Finally, I would submit that Mr. Mosley 's assertion that " the 
bird-laws have interfered with the balance of Nature " is wholly incorrect. 
The only possible effect they could have would be to restore that balance, 
which, in the case of wild fowl and sea birds, had been so rudely upset 
by continued and direct persecution during the breeding season — a 
persecution that was rapidly leading to the extermination of not a few 
species, a result that, I presume, Mr. Mosley himself would deplore. — 
Alfred Newton, Magdalene College, Cambridge, 3rd Dec, 1883. 

Where are the Insects V In the last number of the Naturalist Mr. 
Mosley offers a sensational explanation on the above subject, in which, I 
think, he oversteps all reasonable bounds. Let us examine the basis 
from which Mr. M. obtains such wonderful results. It is nothing less 
than an assertion that the v)hole of the insect-eating birds of England 
destroy 300 caterpillars each per day. This, I maintain, is much too 
large a number, even if they fed on caterpillars alone, which is not the 
case, and I doubt if larvae form more than 25 per cent, of their food. 
That a pair of blue-tits are calculated to destroy 600 caterpillars per day 
during the breeding season may be true, but then these tits are pre- 
eminently caterpillar hunters, and a pair might destroy 600 small, but 
not moderately-sized caterpillars. But Mr. M. bases his calculations on 
a pint measure containing 500 caterpillars, and which he estimated to 
weigh about one pound, and consequently 600 caterpillars would weigh 
almost one and a quarter pounds. There is no doubt birds are gifted 



Short Notes and Qt^ERlEs. 



103 



with good digestion, but the idea of a wrtn or any of the small birds in 
Mr. M.'s list (and 80 per cent, of his list are small birds) eating rather 
more than half a pound per diem is incredible. Yet Mr. M. credits every 
insect-eating bird in England with an equal daily performance, including 
in his lists such species as the swallow, the martin, the sand martin, 
and the snipe ! How are these birds, which spend almost the whole of the 
day circling in the air, each to obtain 300 caterpillars daily ? The absurdity 
of accusing these species of such a daily consumption of caterpillars 
reflects much upon Mr. Mosley's want of sufficient ornithological know 
ledge to handle such a subject. The same remark also applies to his 
wish to have your readers believe that such species as the twite, the 
quail, the nightjar, the Ray's wagtail, and the woodpecker are equally as 
common British birds as the chaffinch and the greenfinch. I have no 
hesitation in saying that Mr. M. will not find many, if indeed any, 
sympathisers with him, should he wish to have the numbers of the species 
of birds he condemns in any way diminished : and I also, as a dweller in 
the country, assert they are not by any means too numerous. In 
conclusion, I would remark that Mr. Mosley has shown an over-anxiety 
to make out his case against the birds, as bats, shrews, &c. , must destroy 
more insects than many of the birds which he has specified can do ; but 
he himself admits he can scarcely credit the results of his own ingenuity. 
— Thomas Carter, Burton House, Mashani. 

Lepidopterous Captures near York. — C. Porcellus, one specimen. 
Strensall Common, 1883 ; Z. ^sculi, one specimen, Tadcaster, 1882 ; L. 
Mesomella, abundant, Sandburn, 1883 ; C. Plantaginis, larvae at bottom 
of coot's nest amongst reeds in splash on Strensall Common, 1882 ; E. 
Apiciaria, common at Askham Bogs, and fairly so on Gutter side, Clifton 
Ings, York, 1883 ; E. Fasciaria, Sandburn, seven or eight specimens, 
1882, two specimens, 1883 ; P. Syringaria, one specimen at Sandburn, 
1883 ; P. Cytisaria, one, 'Sandburn, 1883 ; G. Papilionaria, seven 
specimens, Sandburn, 1883 ; P. Bajularia. seven or eight specimens^ 
Sandburn, 1883 ; A. Blomeraria, two specimens at Helmsley, 1882 ; E, 
Punctaria, a few, Sandburn, 1883 ; A. Strigilaria, Strensall and Sand- 
burn, fairly common, 1883 ; E. Minutata, several at Sandburn, 1883 ; 
T. Firmata, one, Strensall, 1882 ; C. Unidentaria, two or three, 
Sandburn, 1883 ; D. Furcula, larvae from Strensall Common, 1883 ; H. 
Popularis, Sandburn and York, 1882 ; G. Trilinea, common at sugar, 
Sandburn, 1883 ; A. Yalligera, fairly common at sugar, Sandburn, 1883 ; 
O, Suspecta, seven or eight specimens, Sandburn, 1883 ; A. Aprilina, 
nine or ten specimens, Sandburn, 1 882 ; H. Protea, fairly common, 1882 
and 1883.- -W, Hewett, 26, Clarence-street, York. 

Entomological Notes. — I have just added to my collection a series 
of Sussex specimens of Scoparia ingratalis. The species is very 
closely allied to S. pyralalis^ and is probably often passed over as that 
insect. X have also received specimens of Cryptoblahes bistriga and 



104 



The Natttralist. 



Fhycis adelphella, bred from larvae found near Colchester ; and Cramhus 
ericellus, taken at Invergarry. — G. T. Porritt. 

Coleophora mrrucipennella at Doncaster. — In a box of insects caught 
at Green Farm Wood, near Doncaster, kindly named for me by Mr. W. 
Warren, of Cambridge, is a specimen of Coleophora currucipennella. — 
Geo. Tindall, Doncaster. 

TSTatural History Notes for the Barnsley and South Yorkshire 
District. — We have had a few rare bird-occurrences in Barnsley and 
South Yorkshire District, — Oct. 13th, I examined at Wakefield, a hand- 
some short-eared owl, obtained at Ardsley ; also the arctic tern, killed Oct. 
1st, and the Sclavonian grebe, obtained between Wakefield and Barnsley 
in May ; also a nightjar, obtained Oct. 10th, a late occurrrence, Mr. 
Hailstone wrote me an account of a peregrine falcon at Walton, Oct. 9th, 
which stooped on a pigeon and bore it away. The keeper had informed 
me of one capturing a pigeon a few months ago — these, together with the 
osprey, recorded some time back at Walton, add to the list of our raptorial 
birds of recent occurrences ; in addition to which are a pair of ospreys, 
obtained at Strines reservoir, Sept. 22th and 26th, and a marsh-harrier 
obtained near Barnsley at the close of October. The summer migrants, 
especially of the swallow family, have seldom stayed so long with us. 
The swift, always the first to depart, was noted as late as Sep. 28th. The 
sand-martin was seen at Ingbirchworth reservoir, 853 feet above the sea, 
on Oct. 15 ; same date, some were seen chasing insects in the streets of 
Barnsley ; of the house-martin, a pair occurred at Hanningley, near 
Barnsley, Oct. 25th. The swallow in the town, Oct. 26th. These are 
the latest dates we remember, except a late brood of house-martins, 
Nov. 11th, a few years ago, at Pindar Oaks, near Barnsley. The chiff 
chafi" was heard as late as Oct. 11th. Land-rails, killed by partridge 
shooters, up to the middle of Oct. Flocks of gulls have passed over the 
town, in Sept. and Oct. — I had opportunities of seeing many during the 
British Association's Meeting, at Southport, chiefly the common herring, 
the black-headed and kittiwake gulls, and immense flocks of ring- 
dotterels close to the promenade. — T. Lister, Nov. 19th, 1883. 

White Poppy. — An albino, or pure white poppy was found here a few 
days ago, in an out-of-way place ; stem smooth. There was no violet 
patch on the petals. Their whiteness resembled that of the white form 
of Malva mmchata — texture very thin, glossy and silky. — John Emmet, 
Boston Spa, Nov. 21st, 1883. 

NOTICES OF BOOKS, &c.—'' Transactions of the Barnsley Natu- 
ralists' Society," Yol. iii., Pt. iii — This part is fairly up to the average, 
and contains, among other papers, the continuation of Mr. Lister's ^* List 
of the Birds of the Barnsley District," which ought to prove very useful 
to the ornithologists of the district. The title, however, is certainly a 
misnomer, as it includes the birds of Leeds, Halifax, Huddersfield, 
Sheffield, Doncaster, and other places, which have scarcely yet con- 



Reports of Societies. 



105 



sidered themselves as belonging to the Barnsley District" ! We are 
glad to notice the Society has made so successful an effort in its neigh- 
bourhood in enforcing the carrying out of the ^' Wild Birds Protection 
Act, 1880,", an example which might be well followed by other societies. 

The Naturalist's World." — We have received the first number of this 
new addition to the natural science monthlies, and wish it every success. 
It is well printed and nicely illustrated, and if there is sufficient room for 
it among other journals of similar character, it will do good. 

A ConRECTiON. — At page 89, vol. ix., a line in my notes is omitted 
which renders the sense somewhat vague. It the ninth line from the 
bottom I am made to say, I have one, however, which has been taken 
in this district — >S^. perterana.^^ Such should be S. cojispicualis.^^ tS. 
perterana I took from my series of siihjectana in my cabinet, and was 
taken, I believe, in the neighbourhood of Blackhills. — E. P. P. Butter- 
field, Wilsden, near Bingley, December 21st, 1883. 



Rainfall for ftotr^mb^r. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. ' 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

heaviest 
FalL 




Days 


1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

3-54 


22 


35-39 


*30-26 


19 


0-61 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


2-53 


20 


27-74 


22-95 t 


30 


•400 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


3-40 


20 


32-88 


32-16 t 


30 


00-430 


Halifax...(F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


5-53 


21 


46-26 


48-55 


20 


0-88 


Barnsley ... (Dr Sadler)... 


350 


2-57 


20 


30-98 


30-56 


5 


0-55 


Ingbirchworth (Mr. Taylor) 


853 


3-79 


24 


44-39 


45-07 


5 


0-59 


Wentworth Castle (Mr. 

Fisher) 


520 


2-98 


19 


33-84 


31-82 


5 


0-63 


GooLE ,,, (J. Harrison)... 


25 


2-56 


20 


26-86 


29-45 


30 


0-70 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


2.56 


22 


25-76 


§20-99 


30 


0-65 


SCARBORO' (A. Rowntree)... 




3-05 


23 











* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. 
t Average of 29 years, 1853-63, & 1865-83. X Average of 14 years, 1870-83. 



Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Mr. F. Batley in the chair. — 
Arrangements were made for the publication of the Transactions for the 
quarter ended Sept. 30th, and steps taken to forward the proposed 
exhibition for the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union meeting in March. In 



106 



The Naturalist. 



ornithology, during last week of August and part of September, many 
waterfowl were seen by day, and others heard at night, hovering over the 
lights of the town ; of these, eight gulls of middle size hovered over 
Jordan Hill and flew west on Aug. 28th. Another flock of larger gulls 
flew over the town west on Sept. 4th ; eight woodcocks about the 30th 
of August flew over Cockerham, Barnsley, low enough to be observed, in 
a north-west direction — an early arrival. Curlews were heard whistling 
on the night of Sept. 1st ; on Sept. 17th saw a heron flying south near 
Cawthorne, a kestrel at High Flatts, and another at Dodworth. There 
were few birds in song in August and September except the robin's 
autumn song; the yellowhammer, and the starling. The willow- warbler 
re-commenced its low sweet note, and continued until Sept. 28th. The 
chiffchafF's two notes were heard Oct. 11th ; it was one of the last of the 
warblers to depart, and one of the first to arrive in spring. Kingfishers 
reported on all sides ; a few on pools about the town, five or six bred 
in Cawthorne Brook. Magpies, as many as 24 in one day, smaller flocks 
at other times. Goldfinches, bullfinches, and goldcrests have bred 
safely. — T. Lister. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Oct. 30th, the president 
in the chair. — Mr. Soppitt reported that Mr. West had found a slug 
{Limax cinerea nigra) at Shipley Glen, which is new to Yorkshire. He 
exhibited specimens of Rumex dentatus and Fuccinea cegra^ which he had 
received from Mr. B. Grove, Birmingham. Mr. Firth exhibited a box 
of insects, among which were H. defoliaria and D. contaminana from 
Shipley Glen, and E, lichenea from Plymouth. Mr. Carter showed a 
living specimen of Vanessa Antiopa which he had received in the pupa 
state from Toronto ; (7. picata from Kent ; and the following beetles 
from the South of England, viz : — Leistus spinibarhis, Crachmus crepitans, 
Pterostichus cupreus, and Silpha qnadrapunctata ; he also exhibited shells 
found at Frizinghall, Bradford, viz : — Limnea palnstris and ZonHts 
nitidnlus, Mr. Bennett exhibited a very large cluster of the fungus 
PhoUota sguarrosus from Althorpe. A specimen of Stereum purpiireum 
from Idle was exhibited. An interesting paper on Animal Parasites'' 
was read by Mr. A. J. Kershaw, in illustration of which a number of 
slides were shown under the microscope by Messrs. Kershaw, Bennett, 
and Fawcett. 

Meeting, Nov. 13th, 1883, the president in the chair.— Mr. Soppitt 
described a ramble to Malham and Gargrave, and showed specimens of 
truffles from Bell Busk, also fungi preserved in spirits by Dr. Carlyle, of 
Carlisle. He also exhibited a number of specimens of Myriapoda 
(centipedes), inclxxding Julus suhulosus, J. terrestris, Litliohius forficatus, 
Geophilus lo7igicor7iiSj and Polydesmus complanatus. Mr. Carter exhibited 
O. propugnata and S. chrysidiformis from Kent, and Meliphora alveariella 
from Huddersfield. He then reported on the work of the entomological 
section of the society for the past year, and stated that 74 species of 



Reports of Societies. 



107 



lepldoptera have been added to the list, making a total of 448 species 
noted in this district ; to the coleoptera about 30 species have been 
added. Mr. Firth reported for the vertebrate section, and said 22 
species have been added to the mammalia, birds 16, reptiles 5, fishes 3 — 
making a total of 46 species. Mr. West exhibited marine shells, and 
Specimens of polished Devonshire corals. 

Dewsbury ISTatuealists' Society. — Annual meeting, 13th December. 
The following were elected officers for 1884 : — president. Dr. Watts ; 
secretary and treasurer, J. Summersgill. The report stated that the 
society was still in a sound and flourishing condition. The botanical 
section showed most activity, 25 plants during the past season having 
been added to the local flora, which now numbers 393. Satisfaction was 
also expressed at the election of one of the members of this sociaty — Mr. 
P. F. Lee — to the post of phanerogamic secretary. Botanical Section, of 
the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — J. Summersgill, Sec. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting, Nov. 
26th, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) occupying the chair. — The 
secretary (Dr. J. W. Ellis) read a paper in continuation of his previous 
articles on The beetles of the Liverpool district," this being Part iv., 
containing the Brachelytra, or short-winged beetles, of which he enumer- 
ated about 220 species as occurring, or having occurred, in the district, 
with their localities, from the observations of Messrs. Archer, Kinder, 
Wilding, and himself. Among these were several species which have 
hitherto been taken only very sparingly in Britain, and others which are 
very local in their habitats. During the conversazione Mr. Wilding 
exhibited recently captured coleoptera, and Mr. Dixon a coleopterous 
lignivorous larva feeding in willow wood, from Crosby. — J. W. Ellis, 
Hon. Sec. 

Manchester Cryptogamio Society. — Mr. W. H. Pearson, vice- 
president, in the chair, who exhibited three hepatics recently collected in 
Wales, and new to the Principality, viz :~ Scapania uliginosa at Clogwyn- 
dur-Arddu, and Marsupella sphacelata and Cephalozia fluitmis, at Glydr 
Yawr. Mr. Wm. Forster exhibited three fine varieties of Folysiichum 
aculeatum, viz., cruciatiim, pulcherrimum^ and corymhiferum ; these were 
from the fernery^of Colonel Jones, Bristol. The hon. secretary laid upon 
the table a collection of mosses which had been presented to the society 
by Prof. N. Conrad Kindberg, of Sweden. The mosses were from the 
Dovrefield, Norway. An interesting paper was read the same evening by 
Mr. J. Cash on William Wilson's Early Work as a Bryologist in 
Lancashire and Cheshire." — Thos. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 

OvENDEN Naturalists' Society. — Monthly meeting. — The president 
(Mr. James Spencer) gave the annual address, the subject being Fossil 
Fungi." The paper was illustrated by enlarged drawings of fossil 
parasites, and also by microscopical sections of the real specimens, which 
were shown under the society's microscope ; among these were included 



108 



The Natuualtst. 



some fine examples of Peroyiosporites antiquarins, Cystopus carhonarhiSf 
and various other fungoid spores, all of which had been found by the 
lecturer in the Halifax coal strata. He also showed some splendid 
sections of fossil pines from the tertiary strata, containing mycelia and 
spores of a fossil fungus in great abundance and in a beautiful state of 
preservation. These were compared with specimens of mycelia and fungi 
in sections of recent pines (Scotch fir), and the fossil tertiary fungus was 
found to be almost, if not altogether, identical with the recent pine 
fungus, which also closely resembles both in form and habit the vastly 
older carboniferous fungus. Some people afi'ect to despise the study of 
such minute organisms as these, but the important discoveries made 
during the last few years have shown that the microscope is no longer a 
toy, but a necessary adjunct in modern scientific research. The most 
deadly foes with which man has to contend are not the largest beasts of 
the animal kingdom, nor even war and famine, but minute creatures too 
small to be seen by the naked eye, arid which exist in such vast numbers 
and increase with such rapidity as to defy the power of man to contend 
with them. Many of the diseases afi'ecting man, his cattle, corn, and 
vegetables of all kinds, are due to these minute pests. To know your 
enemy is half way to victory, hence the great value of the microscope ; 
and it is no great stretch of imagination to suppose that even the study of 
fossil fungi may ultimately have important bearings upon the question of 
the health and happiness of mankind. 

York and District Field Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Nov. 14, 
1883, at the house of Mr. Prest, Holgate-road, Mr. G. Webster in the 
chair. — After the minutes of last meeting had been read, the hon. sec. 
(Mr. Prest) exhibited specimens of Macrogaster arundinis, Demas coryli, 
Dasydia ohfuscata^ Fidonia conspicnata, Lohophora polycommata, Banhia 
argentula, (E. grandis ; Mr. G. C. Dennis, a fine series of Nonagria 
elymi. The following plants were exhibited : — The chairman, two 
beautiful specimens of LysimacMa thyrsiflora. Mr. H. J. Wilkinson, 
Aguilegia vulgaris (Heslington), Spiroea filipendida (Sandburn), Vicia lathy- 
roides (Acomb), Galium erectum (Hovingham), Astragalus hypoglottis, 
A. glycyphyllos, Asperula cynanchica, Cldora perfoliata, Calamintha 
acinos, Erigeron acris, Hypericum montanum, Thalictrum majus, Atropa 
Belladonna, from Aberford and neighbourhood. 

Meeting, Dec. 12th, 1883, Mr. G. C. Dennis in the chair.— Mr. Prest 
(hon. sec.) exhibited the following rare insects :—Evpithecia irriguata, 
E. togata, Bryophila impar from Mr. Warren, Cambridge, two speci- 
mens of A crony eta alni bred by Mr. J. G. Ross of Bathampton, and 
Agrotis Ashworthii, bred by Mr. C. S. Gregson, of Liverpool. Mr. G. 
Webster exhibited the following : — Lathraea squamaria, Orobanche 
arenaria, 0. ccBridea, 0. rubra, 0. caryophyllacea, O.elatis, 0. picridis, 
0. hedercBj 0. minor ; also a fine specimen of JSaias marinum from 
Norfolk. — Wm. Prest, Hon. Sec. 



dBiiginal Jlrtides 

PPtlMARY CAUSES OF VARIETY IN PLANT STRUCTURE. 



By George Massee. 

Living matter retains its individuality only so long as it is the seat of 
a definite series of physical and chemical changes ; in other words, 
cessation, loss of balance amongst the requisite forces, or the interpo- 
lation of an unnecessary one, are the only known causes of death. 
The harmonious working of the essential forces is always subject to 
the effects of others antagonistic, hence the variety of structure 
presented by plants, which, taking the simplest forms as a starting- 
point, illustrates the relative requirements to counteract the preju- 
dicial effects of conflicting agencies. Water is the medium in which 
the greatest amount of vital activity can be accomplished wdth the 
least amount of specialisation, hence the simplicity of structure com- 
mon to aquatic plants ; not because they do less work in proportion to 
size than other plants, but because favourable surroundings enable 
them to do the required amount with very simple organisation : and 
complication of structure increases in proportion as vegetable life 
recedes from its primordial aquatic birthplace. Provision against 
dessication is generally very manifest in plant structure, least so in 
AlgJB, where every part of the surface is pervious to water and gaseous 
diffusion, and the minute, solitary, unicellular species would be the first 
to suffer from drought. The first departure from this primitive 
simplicity in the way of protection, is illustrated by such genera as 
Palinella^ Gloeocydis^ and Nostor, where the individuals of several 
generations become agglutinated together, forming colonies frequently 
of considerable size ; or dense felt-like strata are produced by some 
species of Spirogj/ra and Conferva \ in both instances each component 
plant retains completely both its morphological and physiological 
individuality. Such conglomerations present no approach to anything 
like specialisation of parts or division of labour, and the explanation 
that most naturally suggests itself is —resistance to drought — on the 
principle that a given amount of matter in one piece takes a longer 
time to become dry than the same amount broken up into numerous 
pieces. The correctness of this view is supported by the fact that the 
colony-forming species have a much wider distribution than their 
solitary relations, due to being able to survive a wdder range of 
surrounding changes. Out of the fifty-one species belonging to the 
Palmellacece enumerated in Cooke's British Fresh-water Algoe," six of 
the rarest species belong to four genera, in which the individuals are 
N.S., Vol. ix. Feb., 1884. 



llu 



The Naturalist. 



isolated or in very small families; whereas four genera forming 
mucilaginous cell families, include twenty-one species, most of which 
are common* The same ratio holds good for Europe generally, as 
shown in Rabenhorst's " Flora Europaea Algarum.'^ This community- 
forming process is far more general among fresh- water than marine 
algae, and it is only when the minute species of the latter grow 
between tides,, and so are exposed to the air for a considerable time, 
that this character is met with, as in Petrocelis omenta^ Peyssonelia 
Dubyi, certain species of Conferva^ Rivularia, &c. This difference of 
habitat is often very marked in species of the same genus, as in the 
marine confervse, where C. to/tuosa forms fleecy tufts on rocks, which 
retain a sufficient quantity of water to prevent dessication during low 
tide ; while G. melagoyviiim^ which never flourishes above low- water line, 
consists of from one to four rigid filaments. The latter is not common 
anywhere, while the former has a v/ide distribution. 

Passing on to the multicellular seaweeds of more complicated 
organisation and in which the individual plants are comparatively 
large, we find the same idea of solid masses, or dense spongy tufts, 
characteristic of plants growing between tides. The first structure is 
illustrated by Leathesia tiiherijormis, the latter, which is most general, 
by such plants as CaUithamnion polyspermum^ and the species of 
Ceramium ; while plants growing in deep water — or if between tides, 
in rock pools — are of a thin membranous nature, as Delesseria sanguinea, 
Ulva latissima, species of Nitophyllum^ Rhodymenia^ &c., which soon 
suffer if exposed to the air. Hepaticge form the transition from 
aquatic to terrestrial veget;ition, and it is in this family that we meet 
with marked modifications of structure, for the purpose of enabling the 
plants to exist under conditions so far removed from those in which 
their progenitors flourished. The change is not abrupt. Riccia nutans 
is a floating water-plant ; others, as J ungermannia inflata, grow in peat 
bogs, or similar places very retentive of moisture. Many have a tufted 
habit of growth ; in such the most evident structural departure from 
algae is the differentiation of parts, while in Marchantia polymorpha we 
are introduced to an entirely new and complicated structure — the 
epidermis — which is waterproof, for the purpose of preventing the dry 
air, to which the surface of the plant is exposed, absorbing its moisture 
too rapidly. This additional structure necessitates the presence of at 
least two others, stomata and roots (at least functionally). This new 
waterproof arrangement does not at once become universal. Mosses 
which yet retain the caespitose habit, and usually grow in wet places, 
have no such protection on the vegetative part, but the fruit, which iv<^ 



Massee : Primary Causes of Variety in Plant Structure:. Hi 



generally elevated into the air on a stalk, has stomata ; and from this 
point, as we ascend in the scale of vegetable development, every 
terrestrial plant has a cuticularised covering provided with stomata. 
The structural changes already mentioned have been the cause of a 
corresponding specialisation of parts and division of labour, unknown 
in the algal family, where every part of the surface served equally as 
an organ of nutrition, so that internal arrangements for the transmis- 
sion of liquids and gases from one part of the plant to another were 
not required. But in land-plants the function of nutrition is restricted 
to those aerial parts possessed of stomata, and to the roots ; and as the 
latter alone absorb liquids, and the aerial parts gases, so the presence 
of an additional complex structure — the fibro-vascular system, which 
acts as a conductor of materials obtained from without, to parts of the 
organism not capable of obtaining them directly — becomes necessary. 

The life-labour of every plant may be divided into two stages : the 
vegetative, on which its existence as an individual depends, and the 
reproductive, which5 owing to the limited existence of individuals, 
provides for the continuation of the species. This provision, in the 
simplest plants, is restricted to one kind, which may be asexual or 
sexual ; but soon we meet with plants possessing the two forms of 
reproduction, and passing through the sequence of changes known as 
alternation of generations, and it will be observed that the gradual 
evolution of complex plants is the result of excessive development of 
one of the two generations, the other remaining in its primitive state, 
or even becoming rudimentary. In those algse where alternation of 
generations is evident, the vegetative part, which is at the same time 
the sexual generation, constitutes the bulk of the plant, and the 
endless variety of form and adaptation is entirely the result of 
development in this part, which in such groups as JucacecE and 
FloridecB attains a high degree of specialisation, the asexual spore - 
bearing stage remaining very small and comparatively unchanged. 
This very marked inequality of development is continued in hepatics 
and mosses, and, as already mentioned, in Marchantia an attempt to 
meet terrestrial conditions is seen in the presence of the epidermis ; 
but it soon becomes evident that the highly-developed sexual genera- 
tion common to seaweeds and mosses cannot so readily adapt itself to 
new surroundings as the more undifferentiated and pliant asexual 
generation, which, from the ferns upwards, constitutes the mass of 
every plant, performs the vegetative functions, and by its marked 
adaptability to all terrestrial conditions has enabled vegetation to 
extend itself over the surface of the globe, and in proportion to its 



112 



The Naturalist, 



development tlie sexual generation becomes more and more rudi- 
mentary. Notwithstanding the increasing specialisation of vegetative 
parts, all cryptogams agree in being dependent on water for effecting 
the important function of fertilization, consequently the organs 
connected with this act retain throughout their primitive simplicity ; 
whereas in flowering plants the departure from this mode of fertiliza- 
tion has rendered necessary some of the most marked modifications of 
structure with which we are acquainted. 

To the foregoing statements there are apparent exceptions, yet the 
sequence of development goes to prove that the leading morphological 
changes met with in the vegetable kingdom may, without fear of 
contradiction, be attributed primarily to a departure from the aquatic 
habitat of the earliest and simplest forms of plant life. 

Oak Road, Scarborough. 

NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 
( Contmited.J 

By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

And now for a rough glance at my early sweethearts, the butterflies 
and moths. They form the solace-link binding my heart from present 
to x>ast— from immeasurable nigger-land to pat little Britain. It was 
the first bred PopuU, Vinula^ Caja^ or Carpini gladdened your heart 
when, after weeks of patient waiting and watching, a damp-winged 
iinaf/o was seen crawling up the chrysalis cage. You — Fellow of a 
dozen learned societies — don't be ashamed of the reminder of a bygone 
characteristic. Here's my hand , old chap ! It was the first fluttering, 
sailing Card id which gladdened my heart, when by the very warmth 
of its welcome I was assured stomachic tumults were over, and that 
one friend at least was ashore, and had made an effort to salute me. 
I waived the flag of truce, and promised that no net of mine should 
ever again damage a painted lady's scaly polonaise. 

Contrasting the home Cardui with ours, although of course they 
are structurally identical, they differ somewhat in their habits. If I 
remember correctly, Cardui was an irregular, fitful visitant, local where 
occurring, nervously disposed, frequenting flowers specially selected, 
and partial to individuals, rarely settling upon tree-trunks (unlike the 
Llanrwst Atalanta\ walls, or palings. Here it is a true Amiens liumani 
generis^ fearless yet prudent, settling on anything — partial to nothing, 
excepting, perhaps, snug corners of verandahs, and age and natural 
decay seem not to weaken its flight. The larvae I have hitherto found 



Bairstow . Natural History Notes from South Africa. 118 



only on a huge species of thistle, with variegated leaves, occurring 
gregariously in nests. This immediate district I do not consider a first- 
rate one for butterflies; and certainly not a patch on Uitenage— of 
which more anon—twenty miles away. 

Indeed the butterflies of South Africa altogether did not strike me 
as being particularly rich in natural development or of number of 
species. I doubt not that a casual observer in his world-wide travels 
would under-estimate our khopalocera, Howbeit my remarks require 
qualifying, for I have not yet been privileged to reach elysium — Natal. 
The butterflies found a worthy historian in Trimen. An entomologist 
diving for the first time into Rliop. Jf, Am. pronounces the description 
wordy and tedious. Each succeeding dip convinces him contrariwise. 
They are admirable and exhaustive. A combination of Triraen'a 
descriptions and Vollenhoven's figures for a scientific insect biography 
approximates perfection. Very many orders are strangely neglected 
here, but the butterflies cannot reasonably complain. Such names as 
D' Urban, Bowker, Barber, -Anderson, Fairbridge, Wentworth, and 
others, went far in scoring on their behalf a literary success. I grant 
a slight disappointment concerning the butterflies of South Africa, but 
don't misunderstand, coming events cast their shadows before." 
Shades of expected nymphs cast an all too beauteous efi'ect on my ex- 
ulting dreams, 'ere I left the old country. 

View a noble Papillo Merope^ restlessly wafting his creamy wings 
upon a subtle air-wave ; darting swiftly, mockingly beneath, to rise 
again, proud aristocrat, with lordly, aye, majestic ease ; swooping again 
in sportive mood ; swelling (?) his imperial thorax, flaunting his glis- 
tening robes, as if to scorn the w^eakly efl*orts, vulgar improprieties, 
forsooth ! of incapable underlings, who strive to emulate, but fail to 
imitate their chief's example. 

Or the modest l.yccBm falemoii^\ butterfly Tom Thumb, pretty little 
chap, flitting amongst sequestered uncanny nooks, quaffing fragrant 
nectar from the cups of gold " of pygmean flowers ; ascertaining himself 
— 50«zt'body — caring for — /nobody — exacting not homage but forcing 
respect. Now, lover of the beautiful, stern moralist, doff your hat, 
clap hands on heart, kiss the book and swear an unrestricted allegiance 
to the race. My best takes or observations in the district are Pierk 
agath'uta (1), Pirns leveriua (1), Eronia Eleodora (profuse where it 
occurs), Terlas RaJiel, Meiierls Tu / dog h la {placed by Trimen amongst the 

* Not seen in Port Elizabeth. Common, Perie bush (a grand hunting ground) 
and Zuurburg fond of woods. Expands Sin. 61in. 

t Smallest South African species. Occurs in Port Elizabeth. I have one 
specimen under T^lin. 



114 



The Naturalist. 



Nymphalid(je), PJillognoma Vararies (seen several times, not captured), 
Ijoxura alcides, Zeritis Alphaeus (one, an immense fly, considerably 
larger than Trimen's limit, lin. 10-|lin.), LyccEna ceiaens^ Zeritis Thysbe, 
Z. Tliyra, Pyrgits ehna^ and Nisoniades Djaelaelae. 

Half a day in the Perie bush gave me . Debis dendrophilus, Pier is 
agatliina^ Tapilio Metope, Pyrameis liippomene, ^^Atella phalanta (our 
solitary fritillary), Nisoniades Kobela^ and Lycmia Delegorgui. My local 
list is not very grand, and might be largely augmented if I recorded 
observations. Many of the Fieridoe fly in tantalising manner before 
the collector, and then dash forward over the prickly bush. At 
Uitenhage many species occur, although strangers to Port Elizabeth. 
Floral life, both natural and imported, is much stronger there — hence 
the contrast. 

When I lived there about eighteen months ago, the gardens bore 
every appearance of neglect, and v^^eeds monopolised the fertile soil. 
Fennel grew rank and proved a capital recreation ground for all sorts 
of insects. Wild creepers stretched • aloft their pliable arms in 
competitive haste to reach the summits where they bloomed, 
and whilst the leaves inveigled larval appetites, the blossoms 
tempted insect tongues and insect jaws. Where nectar, juicy 
essence is, are winged gluttons. Where big dinners locate^ 
chameleons are certainties. I counted forty-seven of these un- 
gainly body-snatchers on a quince hedge bordering my garden, one 
evening when I was busy mothing. The reptiles totally ignored the 
near approach of lighted wick. Their faculty of changing hue is yet 
unexplained. Their peculiarity of moving the eyes independently of 
one another is striking. The chameleon is a sluggard and a fool, but 
not such a fool as he looks. Does it not pay him to be torpid % To 
what law of nature does his colour-change respond % Is it a protective 
instinct prompting % I cannot quite accept such an hypothesis, but 
should prefer the idea that a rapid and metamorphic assumption mis- 
leads his prey. He caimot or will not hasten his movements, and 
trusts principally to the dexterity of his tongue, which, likely as not, 
may ' miss its shot.' I have lost, but lost awhile ! I shall now turn 
strategist ! Let me become for the nonce another creature and assimi- 
late ! But how % By change of form % That is impossible ! By change 
of colour % Ah ! I have hit the mark ! Eureka ! See ! the fly deceived 
returns to its haunt. Slick glides chameleon's tongue, and slick Mons. 
Dipteron glides down, down, down, into the remote regions of reptilian 
digestion. Is my theory far fetched ? Then dont accept it with 
scientific gusto.,. 

(To he continued.) 
* Mr. Rous, I believe, took one in Burmah. 



CONCHOLOGIOAL NOTES FROM THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF HaTFIELD 

Chase. - -The following notes refer to two days' collecting in the low-lying 
country a little south of Hatfield Chase, and near the junction of the 
counties of York, Nottingham, and Lincoln. The first was on the 14th 
April, the second on 14th of May, starting in each case from Finningley 
station. In April, Mr. W. Eagle Clarke and Mr. W. Denison Roebuck 
took the Wroot road ; in the Nottinghamshire portion of it nothing was 
found in the roadside ditches but Pisidmm pusillum, Planorhis spirorhis, 
and Limncea peregray ail in abundance. Crossing the border into York- 
shire the two latter species were still in abundance, and with them were 
associated in equal plenty Fisidinm nitidum, and Limnoea trnncatula. 
Soon was reached where the Gravel Drain (apparently so named from the 
nature of its bottom) crosses the boundary separating Yorkshire from 
Lincolnshire. While investigating it. Clarke had the satisfaction of re- 
establishing the claim of Paludina contecta (apparently now extinct in 
its former localities) to rank as a Yorkshire mollusc. He found a speci- 
men floating on the surface down the drain, the water of which flows 
from west to east. He also obtained here Limncea stagnalis, and his 
companion obtained Valvata piscinalisj L. peregra, FJiysa fontimalisj and 
Flanorhis vorttx. Crossing here into Lincolnshire, and investigating the 
ditches bordering Sampson's lane, Bythinia tentaculata, Limncea peregra, 
L, palustrisy Flanorhis carinatns, Ft. contortus, FL vortex, and Fhysa 
fonthialis occurred plentifully, being encrusted with a ferruginous deposit 
at one portion of the ditch. A quantity of debris collected about the piles 
supporting Candy Hall Bridge, on the Black Bank Drain, produced 
Valvata piscinalis, Bythinia tentaculata, L. peregra, Flanorhis contortus, 
F. albns, Fhysa fontinalis, and a solitary land-shell, Zonites nitidus. 
Examining the Black Bank Drain itself was disappointing, and the ditch 
which runs parallel with it, and at the foot of the embankment was found 
to be very much more productive, yielding numerous species in 
abundance, including V. pisoinalis, B. tentacidata, B. Leachii, L. 
peregra, L. palustris, Fh. carinatns, and Fhysa fonimalis plentifully, 
together with a few specimens of Sjohcerium corneum and Lirmioea stagnalis. 
The examination of the Yorkshire portion of the same line of ditches 
produced the same collection of species, with the exception of L. palustris, 
and L. stagnalis, and also added four more species of Flanorhis — 
P. alhus (a few), P. corneus (local, and very young), P. vo7'tex and 
P. contortus {in i>\entj) . This finished the day's investigation, and the 
walk to Doncaster was productive of nothing but Limax agrestis near 
Cantley, and Limnma peregra, the only inmates of an apparently 
promising ditch on the race course (recently cleaned out, a thing repug- 
nant to all naturalists, especially when applied to localities for Melicerta 
ringe7is and other interesting forms of life, as in this case). The May 



116 



The Naturalist. 



expedition was undertaken by Messrs. W. Nelson, J. W. Taylor, and W. 
D. Roebuck. On this occasion the line of route was entirely in Yorkshire; 
starting from Finningley, and proceeding due north, through Blaxton, 
where Nelson found specimens of Helix nemoralis, var. oUvacea. At Blaxton 
Grange, the examination of a series of productive ditches soon provided 
ample employment. The only land shells taken were solitary examples 
of Zonites alliarius and Succinea elegans, taken by Roebuck. The water 
shells taken included Fisidium nitidnm, both species of Bythinia, 
Valvata piscijialis, Flanorhis covneus, P. contortus, P. complanatiis, P. 
vortex, P. spirorhisy Physa fontinalis, Limnoea stagnalis, L. palustris, 
and L. peregra, all in more or less abundance. The specimens of L. 
peregra included its varieties, ovata^ acnmiyiata, and ohlonga. The Gravel 
drain and adjoining ditches were next reached, examined throughout its 
three miles course up to Ackholme, yielding Bythiyiia Leachiij V. 
piscinalis, PI. alhus, P. vortex, P. contortus, P. complanatus, Physa 
fontinalis, Limna^a palustris, and L. peregra. From this point, a line 
was struck for the River Torne, which was crossed by a plank bridge ; 
here Roebuck found a solitary specimen of Physa hypnornm in a shallow 
grassy puddle. In the river itself was found L. stagnaVs, L. auricularia, 
L. peregra, Physa fontinalis, Planorbis contortus and P. carinatus, and 
Pisidium p)usiUum. AtKilham occurred Avion hortensis and the familiar 
L. agrestis. No further search was made until the woods in Cantley Park 
were reached ; here careful search amongst dead leaves and the ivy which 
carpeted the ground rewarded us with Vitrina pellucida, Zonites fidvus, 
Z. crystallinus, Helix hortensis (young). Vertigo edentula (somewhat com- 
monly), a single specimen of V. pusilla, and several Cochlicopa luhrica. 
The weather was unfavourable for land mollusca, of which very few were 
observed. 

Badger at Masham. — On the 5th of December last, the Bedale hounds 
met at the Sleningford Park, the seat of John Dalton, Esq. (six miles 
from Masham, four from Ripon). The covers having been drawn blank, 
a terrier was sent up an artificial earth which sometimes holds a fox, but 
it shortly emerged bearing signs of having come off second best in an 
underground conflict. A second terrier was then procured, and both 
went up the earth. A confused scuffling was heard, and soon both dogs 
appeared, having been unable to dislodge the occupant. Spades were 
now brought into requisition, when, to the astonishment of all j)resent, a 
fine badger bolted through the pack standing round, and escaped in the 
surrounding cover, the hounds not owning the scent. It is many years 
since a badger has been seen in this neighbourhood, though they were 
formerly plentiful. — Thomas Caktek, Burton House, Masham. 

Redshanks Nesting at Masham— On the 8th of April, 1883, a pair of 
redshanks made their appearance in a large marshy field, which seemed to 
furnish them with an abundant supply of food, for they never left it for 
any length of time. When disturbed, they would round uttering their 



Notes and Queries. 



117 



rich notes, but although they sometimes extended their flight to a distance 
of half-a-mile, they invariably returned as soon as the cause of their alarm 
had gone. On the 13th of May I found the nest of the birds in the centre 
of the enclosure. The eggs, four in number, were snugly concealed in an 
overhanging tuft of grass, and a few pieces of bent and grass only inter- 
vened between them and the ground. They were very richly marked 
specimens, and this is the first known instance of redshanks breeding in 
this locality. A pair of this species visited the same piece of land six years 
ago, but after staying a day or two they disappeared ; and though they 
might have bred on some of the moors around, T never heard of anyone 
having noticed them. — Thomas Carteh, Burton House, Masham. 

Notes on Birds' Nests from North Yorkshire, — In the past nesting 
season of 1883, the following came under my observation : — The first nest 
I found, containing eggs, was on April 6th, and was that of a green 
peewit. The eggs were five in number, all similarly marked, and 
evidently produced by the same bird. There were no footsteps near the 
nest, so the fifth egg could not have been added by anyone. It is the 
first nest of this species I ever found containing more than four eggs, and 
though I have made enquiries of professional egg gatherers, I cannot hear 
of anyone having noticed this number of eggs before. This clutch of eggs 
was destroyed, and on May 13th, in the same field (a ploughed one), 
about thirty yards from the first nest, there was again a peewit's nest 
containing five eggs. On June 15th, when beating up a tall hedgerow, I 
startled a willow wren from its nest, which was built in the usual domed 
shape, but was placed in the top of a thick blackthorn bush, three and a 
half feet from the ground. In the centre of a marshy field, snugly con- 
cealed in a tussock of tall grass, and quite on the ground, was a blackbird's 
nest. The nearest bush was fully twenty yards distant, and as the field 
was bounded by fences, the birds could not have been at a loss for an 
ordinary site. Another blackbird's nest I found twenty-five feet from the 
ground, against the trunk of a large tree, in a cavity formed by the 
tearing ofi" of a bough. A third was built in a wood, on the stump of a 
hazel bush just raised from the surface of the ground, but quite concealed 
by a luxuriant growth of dogs mercury. A clutch of chaffinch's eggs were 
perfectly blue, without any spots. In a disused chimney pot, which was 
blocked up not far from the top, a starling took up its abode, and though 
the nest was quite open to the heavens, the young ones were safely reared. 
A swallow built its nest inside a moveable hut on wheels (very similar to 
a bathing machine, and used as a cake receptacle), which had only been 
recently brought into a field, and was some quarter of a mile from any 
house. The young fledged in due course. In a cavity in the river bank, 
formed and occupied the previous year by a pair of kingfishers, was placed 
a sand martin's nest, which contained eggs when I found it. Putting my 
fingers inside a chaffinch's nest, and expecting to find eggs, I was some- 
what startled to find it occupied by a large humble bee, which had a 



118 



The Naturalist. 



goodly lump of comb and ceils snugly placed under the hair lining. 
Built in a mass of dead leaves, which covered the ground in a wood, was 
a wood wren's nest, and in such an exposed situation, that when the 
bird left, the eggs were plainly visible from some few yards distance. 
There was no grass or anything green growing anywhere near the nest, 
which is the more remarkable because, as a rule, the nests of this species 
are so carefully concealed. A dead twig or two projected above the 
surface of the leaves round the site, but they aflorded not the slightest 
shelter. — Tom Carter, Burton House, Masham. 

Natural History Notes for the Barnsley and South Yorkshire 
District. — For the quarter ended Dec. 31st. — October 1, the arctic tern 
occurred in a pool between Wakefield and Barnsley ; 7th, the grey wag- 
tail in Calder vale, near Horbury (it visits us in winter, and very rarely 
stays to breed in our lowland tracts of South Yorkshire) ; 23rd, redwings 
and fieldfares, first notice of arrivals — scarce about here. Woodcocks 
obtained in great numbers, from 8th about Wombwell, 9th at Sunny Bank, 
and a few in the Stainborough woods. A flight of eight was reported 
Sept. 5th ; Nov. 10, a green sandpiper at Walton Lake side, reported by 
Mr. Hailstone's keeper ; 18th, the great-crested grebe killed in a pool 
between Wakefield and Barnsley. The latest date of house martins is 
Nov. 18th, at Cliff Wood, Barnsley ; of swallows, Dec. 13th, noted by 
Mr. Wrigglesworth at Lupsitt. I don't remember such late dates as 
these in the South Yorkshire district. Our resident songsters have sung 
merrilj'- through the Christmas and New-year season — all the thrush 
family, the song thrush, storm cock, aiid blackbird, also occasionally the 
starling and skylark. Kingfishers are found about streams, canals, and 
pools in county and town. A rare winter visitor, the siskin, has occurred 
in flocks close to our doors, in the railway excavation below Victoria 
Bridge, along with bulfinches, great and blue tits, yellow and reed 
buntings. Hooded crows about Ackworth, Mexbro', and Wath. A dog- 
otter was killed near Bolton-in-Dearne Dec. 16th, one at the same place 
eighteen months ago ; it is the fifth captured in the Dearne valley within 
about two years. One fortunately escaped. The common bat (Vesper- 
tilis pipistrellus) was flying about on Christmas eve as on summer evenings 
at Wentworth Castle.— T. Lister, Jan. 19th, 1884. 

Lasiocampa ilicifolia. — The addition of a nice pair of this insect to my 
cabinet a few days ago reminded me that the species still wants 
re-discovering in our county. It used to occur regularly on the moors 
near Sheffield and Ripon, but has not been taken there, nor elsewhere in 
Britain for some years. There is very little doubt it still exists in the 
county, and it should be diligently searched for among bilberry in its old 
haunts, as well as on the moors about Grassington and other parts of 
Wharfedale, Blubberhouses, Bingley, on the borders of the county near 
Greenfield and Mossley, and other likely places. It certainly ought to be 
turned up this year. Who will do it ? — G. T. Porritt. 



Notes and Queries. 



119 



Where are the Insects ?" — I am very much gratified that my 
communication (p, 85) on the above subject has called forth a rejoinder 
from so able a man as Prof. Newton, but I must beg a few lines in reply, 
and will try to be as courteous in my remarks as he has been in his. 
First, let me assure him that I have an equal love for both birds and 
insects, and if I were obliged to give up one, I really do not know which 
it would be. He says I have exaggerated the bird population of this 
country. 1 may have done ; tangible statistics are difficult to obtain, but 
if we say half, or even if we reckon my calculation for one county as the 
population of all England, the results will be astonishing enough. But 
if a flight of goldcrests reaches from the Faroes to the Channel Islands, 
and if a flight of jays took three days to pass Heligoland {Nat. p. 95), 
there must be a great lot of birds somewhere . He next says that England 
was quite full of most of the birds I name, and that they were not 
subjected to persecution before the passing of the Bird Acts. Then what 
are the Acts for ? I beg respectfully to difi'er with him on both these 
points (I am speaking of Yorkshire), for I feel quite certain that there 
was room for many more birds, and with the stoppage of pop-guns, the 
continued persecution of birds of prey, and the protection of birds and 
eggs, I do not see how the small birds can help but have increased. As 
to persecution, both birds and eggs were, and to some extent still are, 
shamefully persecuted ; the birds, by every farmer's man or country lad 
who had a gun ; — they shot them for mere sport, some not even stopping 
to pick them up. I have heard of forty dozens of skylarks being taken 
out of snares by one man in one day, their necks screwed, and sent to 
market. Is this persecution ? The eggs were hunted up in hundreds by 
schoolboys, placed upon a wall, and pelted with switches. Moisture dims 
my eyes to think of it; perhaps from my ^^want of sufficient ornitho- 
logical knowledge." I have known gamekeepers take a stick and beat 
down all the nests of small birds they could find. Is this persecution 1 
But these matters cannot be remedied by Act of Parliament. What we 
want is to teach the child, from the first day it enters the school, to be 
kind to all living creatures ; that each one has its proper place in nature, 
and should be respected and studied ; then nature will manage her own 
aff'airs without the intervention of Acts of Parliament. What are the 
birds that were rapidly being exterminated 1 I suppose Prof. Newton 
alludes to the birds at Flamborough Head, where this protection 
originated. I happen to know something about it, and I can assure him 
that the accounts of the birds killed there have been greatly exaggerated. 
My father went there every season for twenty-one years before the jDassing 
of the Act, and killed perhaps more birds than any one man besides. He 
generally had with him from two to five companions with guns, and I do 
not deny that he was perhaps the main cause of the agitation against 
shooting. This, for my own part, I deeply regret ; a true naturalist will 
never shoot a bird unless he really wants it. But, as a matter of fact, if 
a working man wants a day's shooting he has as much right to have it at 



120 



TnE Naturalist. 



the sea coast as my lord has in the covert. If he wants the birds to make 
money of, he has the same right as the fisherman who catches two or 
three hundred herrings per day. There is no moral law to interfere and 
say the birds do not belong to him. Before any Protection Acts were 
thought of, I have often heard my father say that he could never see the 
birds get one less. I have very little space left to reply to Mr. Carter. 
He does not seem to know that the fly which flies in the air has anything 
to do with the caterpillar. The only diff'erence it would make to my 
calculation is, that the caterpillar may only produce one fly, but the fly 
would produce hundreds of caterpillars if permitted to live. Mr. Carter 
tries to ridicule my statement of a pair of small birds destroying 600 
caterpillars per day during breeding-time. The calculation is not mine, 
but is recorded by an eye-witness. It would have been more to the point 
if I had said insects, but every intelligent person must see that this was 
ir^tended ; and I should think a single tit or creeper will destroy more 
than that quantity itself when, searching for insects' eggs, &c.,inthe 
crevices of bark. — S. L. Mosley, Beaumont Park, Huddersfield. 

Transactions of the Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Mr. T. 
Lister wishes us to state that the title of his paper, as sent to the editor 
of the Transactions " (A^a^. ix., p. 104), was Birds of the Barnsley 
and South West Yorkshire District." This title accords much better 
with the contents of the paper. 

The Report of the ' Local Scientific Societies' Committee ' or 
the British Association." — It is clear, from the report before us, that 
the committee have fully and thoroughly accomplished the w^ork they 
se^. out for themselves in 1882. They tell us they ^^have communicated 
with all the societies known to them which appear to fall under the desig- 
nation of *Mocal scientific societies which publish their proceedings,' 
giving to this definition a somewhat liberal interpretation, and they 
submit a tabular list of these societies, with notes of their publications 
and other particulars. They are about 170 in number, and seem, from 
their rules and publications, to be centres whence local scientific inform- 
ation may conveniently be obtained. " This list of societies is the most 
striking feature in the report, and cannot fail to be as useful as it is 
interesting. It is brought up to November, 1882, and besides the full 
title of each society is given the head-quarters or name and address of 
the secretary ; the number of members ; the amount of the entrance fee 
and annual subscription ; the title and size of its publications ; the 
frequency of issue, and other remarks. We are sure the committee could 
not possibly have done their work better, and we have perfect confidence 
that it is the beginning of much useful work in future years. 

Correction. — On page 103 of the last number of the ISaturalisty in the 
sixth line from the top, the word snipe " has been printed in error. 
Instead of snipe," read swift. " — Thomas Carter. 



Rainfall fou December, 



121 



OBITUARY. —Jonathan Thornton.— On the 11th of January, by the 
death of Mr. J. Thornton, at the advanced age of 86, the Hudders6eld 
NaturaUsts' Society lost another of its earliest and oldest members. 
Though he never made any pretension to being a scientific naturalist, he 
was formerly an ardent collector of botanical specimens, and his kind and 
genial disposition gave him a large circle of intimate friends : and, some 
years ago, his fellow-members of the Huddersfield Naturalists* Society 
showed their appreciation of his worth by electing him their president. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
leveL 


Rain- 
lalL 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

Heaviest 
Fail. 






1883. 


1882. 


Fall. 


Huddersfield (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
1-67 


17 


37-06 


*33-74 


14 


0-24 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


1-06 


13 


28-80 


24-99 t 




0-22 


HOESFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


1-43 


14 


34-31 


32-93 Z 


15 


0-35 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


370 


21 


49-96 


55-25 


11 


0-69 


Barnsley ... (Dr. Sadler)... 


350 


0-86 


18 


31-84 


35-71 


11 


0-18 


Ingbirch WORTH (Mr. Taylor) 


853 


1-84 


18 


46-23 


51-02 


11 


0-30 


Wentworth Castle (Mr. 

Fisher) 


520 


107 


14 


34 91 


37-41 


11 


0-29 


Goole (J. Harrison).. 


25 


1-36 


19 


28-22 


34-44 


16 


0-58 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


1.24 


22 


23-04 


§ 27-21 


16 


0-24 


SCARBORO' (A. Rowntree)... 


130 


219 


23 


27-99 




15 


0-46 


Thirsk...(W. Gregson) ...... 


100 


1-22 













* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. 
t Average of 29 years, 1853-63, & 1865-83. t Average of 14 years, 1870-83. 

il Average of 17 years, 1866-82—29-74. 
§ Total fall of the year, 27-21 inches on 201 days. Maximum fall 10th Sept., 
1*15 inches. 4*35 October fall should have been 3-35, and 1 11 greatest on the 1st, 
should have been '73 on the 14th. 



^egorb of Sonelus. 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting Nov. 4th, the president, 
Mr. T. Lister, in the chair. — He gave a paper on The Birds of Canada 
which occur in Britain," with reference to the British Association 
Meeting at Montreal in 1884. 

Meeting, Nov. 18th, Mr. F. Batley in the chair. —The secretary laid 
on the table books, reports, ike, received from the Scientific and 
Naturalists' Societies connected with the British Association. A very able 



122 



The Naturalist. 



paper was read by Mr. W. Harrison on Air, and Sources of Disease 
from Impurities." — T. Lister. 

Beadfoed Natuealists' Society. — The first meeting of the year was 
held Jan. 15th. The president, Dr. H. W. Evans, occupied the chair, 
Mr. J. Saville described a recent ramble to the neighbourhood of Cot- 
tingley, and exhibited several plants indicating the mildness of the 
season ; Mr. B. Illingworth, a curious malformation of the hind foot of a 
cow, in which the bones of the toes had all grown together. Mr. H. T. 
Soppitt described several recent rambles, exhibited several early- 
plants in bloom, and reported having found a fungus, Cortinarius ileopo- 
diusj new to the district. Mr. J. W. Carter exhibited several rare shells, 
which were described by the president ; Mr. J. Firth, a number of 
lepidoptera which pass the winter in the perfect state, which were 
described and named by Mr. Carter. Dr. Evans then delivered his 
inaugural address on Conchology." He dwelt at considerable length on 
the general organisation of the mollusca, pointing out their most curious 
method of reproduction, the structure of the shell, and their mode of 
locomotion. In dealing with their habits he showed how these animals 
pass the winter by depositing at the mouth of the cell a kind of film to 
keep out the cold, whilst in tropical countries many species pass through 
the hot period by depositing a similar film and burrowing in the ground. 
Dr. Evans then referred to the carnivorous habit of a marine species that 
is found on the Yorkshire coast, which has a peculiar method of drilling 
into the shells of other species and devouring the inmates. Almost all the 
land and fresh-water species are herbivorous. One species (Testacella) 
feeds on earth-worms. In size, the mollusca vary from extreme minute- 
ness to very large and gigantic species. The largest land-shells are found 
in South Africa, and belong to the genus Achatina, which is represented in 
this country by an almost microscopic species. The address was listened 
to with great interest, and a hearty vote of thanks was passed at its conclu- 
sion. Mr. West showed a drawing of an abnormal mushroom in which a 
second example was growing inverted out of a large specimen. 

Dewsbury Natuealists' Society. — January meeting, the new presi- 
dent (Dr. Watts), delivered his inaugural address, thanking the members 
for their courtesy in electing him. — He observed that, according to the 
syllabus of the society, addressess were to be given during the year on 
subjects connected with almost all branches of Natural History. Perhaps 
he might be allowed to mention the study of insects as peculiarly interest- 
ing, their various metamorphoses through egg, caterpillar, chrysalis, to 
the imago or perfect insect. It was by a process of prolonged and careful 
observation that physiologists had shown the various parasitic worms which 
infest the bodies and alimentary tracts of man and beasts — the perfect 
worm not being developed in the same species of animal as its progenitor, 
going through three changes before it arrives at maturity, and is capable 
of propagating its species. By this discovery physicians were enabled to 
point out with certainty, that by subjecting animal food to a proper heat 



Reports of Societies. 



123 



before its ingestion, that all danger from parasites was avoided. Then 
there were the bees, wasps, and ants. What studies had been opened 
out by watching the habits of these insects ; none had been too closely 
watched and studied, and the president pointed out what facts had been 
gained respecting them, asking at last, if he endeavoured to enumerate 
the interesting objects for study, where to stop ; how in this beautiful 
world every portion of which teemed with animate or inanimate books, 
so to speak, open for the perusal of those who care to learn or read ; 
some, perchance, written in a language known to few ; some in, for the 
present, an unknown tongue, but all giving pleasure by their taste, 
beauty, or utility. The president proceeded to give a general description 
of the circulation of the blood, of the organs which carry it on, from those 
invertebrata, wherein the circulatory apparatus consists of a slight tube, 
with a contractile portion, which gently moves the vital fluid to and fro, 
apparently without any defined or continuous current, to the vertebrate 
mammalia, where it attains its most complicated apparatus and course, 

— J. SUMMEKSGILL, Hon. ScC. 

Heckmondwike Naturalists' Society. — Twenty-second annual meeting 
Dec. 29th, 1883, the retiring president (Mr. J. M. Barber) in the chair. — 
Dr. Stewart was unanimously elected president, Mr. J. Norcliff secretary, 
and Mr. J. M. Barber representative to the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. 
A paper was then read on The Mistletoe." The following plants, sent 
by Mr. W. B. Boyd, of Faldonside, Melrose, were exhibited : — Carex 
rupestvis, C. rigida, C. pancijiorus, C. vaginata, C. atrata, Sartssiirea 
alpina, Epilobium angustifolium, Veronica saxatilis, Tofieldia palustris, 
Lychnis viscavia, Pyrola secunda, Listera cordata, Gymnadenia conopseaj 
Salix reticulata, Jnncus castaneus, Alopecurus alpinusj Luzxda arcnata, 
Phlceiim alpimini. The alpine plants from Glen Callater and district, 
and Roxburghshire. — J. M. Bakber. 

Huddersfield Naturalists' Society. — Meeting, Jan. 7th, Mr. A. 
Clarke, president, in the chair. — Mr. Mosley exhibited nest of red- 
backed shrike and eggs, nest of cirl bunting from Surrey, and eggs of 
mute swan from Newcastle, gannet from Bass Rock, and red-throated 
diver from Iceland ; also the first flower of the year, the Christmas rose 
{Hellehorus niger). The president said the publication of Transactions had 
been undertaken, and the report, and new catalogue of the butterflies 
and moths of the district, was in the printer's hands. Many valuable 
books had been added to the library, and it now contained works which 
could not be obtained in any other library in the town. He believed that 
the coming year would see much useful work done. The secretary (Mr. 
S. L. Mosley) referred to the work to be done during the coming year, 
the organisation of the rambles, the society's future publications, and to 
the fact that a museum is probably being started for the town. The 
matter is in the hands of the Technical School Committee, and the 
Naturalists' Society should do all in its power to secure a good depart- 



124 



The Naturalist 



ment of Natural History, and to do something to furnish that depart- 
ment. The society's cabinet might be fitted-np with local collections of 
insects, shells, eggs, &c., and placed in the museum. Natural History 
was much neglected in giving an education to the young, and children 
left school with very little to occupy their minds. A museum could be 
made a centre from which a love of nature might be made to radiate in 
all directions, and either a love of nature or art will, more than anything 
else, keep young men and young women from evil habits and intem- 
perance. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — Fifth annual meeting of the 
society. Dr. B. Carrington in the chair. — The honorary secretary 
read the annual report, which briefly reviewed the work done during the 
last year, noticing the cryptogams which had been discovered by the 
members and their friends, ps being new to sci-ence or to the British flora. 
Two new continental species had been brought before their notice by a 
French corresponding member, and quite a number of new localities for 
rare species had been made known, as well as fruiting specimens of 
species which had not hitherto been found in this condition in Britain. 
The most noticeable of those being found in fruit may be mentioned : — 
Gymnosfom iim cal car eum said Mnium. stellar e, in Derbyshire, by Mr. Holt, 
and Fissidens rufulus in Yorkshire, by Mr. West. The literary work of 
the society had been pleasant and interesting, including papers by Mr. 
Cash, on The History of Cmclidhini styghim as a British moss," and 
the Early Bryological Work of Mr. Wm. Wilson in Ireland, Scotland, 
Anglesea, Cheshire and Lancashire." Dr. Carrington contributed a large 
number of letters from eminent Cryptogamic botanists who lived in the 
present century, and who had been correspondents of the well known 
artisan botanist, Edward Hobson. It was also satisfactory to know that 
Dr. Carrington and Mr. Pearson had issued their third Fasciculus of the 
Bejyaticce Britannicce Exsiccatoe. The following were elected officers of the 
society for the ensuing year : — President, Dr. B. Carrington, F.KS.E., 
secretary and treasurer, Mr. Thos. Pogers. During the evening Mr. 
Forster exhibited a splendid series of twenty-two varieties of the common 
Folypodivm vulgare, all of them very remarkable, and some of them most 
beautiful in form ; these were from the fernery of Mr. J. M. Barnes, of 
Milnthorpe. Mr. George Stabler sent specimens of Lophocolea spicata^ 
Tayl., collected by the late Mr. Wilson, near Conway. The species had 
not hitherto been recorded as growing in Wales. Mr. Stabler also sent 
Jung. Schraderi from a new locality near Sedbergh, collected by himself, 
Oct., 1882. Another rarity was Bryiim concmnatum (Spruce), from the 
Pass of Llanberis, collected May, 1883. Mr. Cash exhibited specimens 
of Andrecea sparsifolia, which had been collected on Helvellyn, in Sep- 
tember last, by the Rev. C. H. Waddell. The thanks of the society were 
accorded to Dr. R. Braithwaite, F.L.S., for all the parts yet published of 
his British Moss Flora," and to the Royal Microscopical Society for 
their Journal and Proceedings. — T. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 



#tt0rnd Jl dicks. 



IN THE TROPICS. 

By E. Dcjkinfield Jones, C.E. 

[Read before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society, 
May 28th, 1883.] 

If I were asked what is the nearest approach to perfect bliss that it ii^ 
given to man to enjoy, I should reply, The sensations of a naturalist 
on his first entrance into a tropical forest." And especially might this 
be said of a naturalist whose delight is the study of the insect world. 
In all branches of biology the riches laid before him are something 
beyond the conception of the most vivid imagination, and the exquisite 
beauty and grandeur of the scene have an effect upon his senses that 
can only be described by the word enchantment." 

But with the entomologist the general feeling of delight soon gives 
way to a perfect absorption in his own particular study, and a com- 
plete forgetfulness of all else. His main difficulty will be to get 
beyond the outskirts of the forest at all, for every leaf and flower, 
every stick and stone, attracts his attention and calls for inspection. 
Indeed it is the outskirts that form the most productive and most 
interesting portion of the woods, especially in regard to lepidoptera, 
for the deeper we penetrate into the recesses of the gloomy interior the 
less do we find of the brilliant life that that order gives to the scene. 
And in the midst of the giant vegetation the butterflies confine them- 
selves mostly to the tops of the trees, where their brilliant hues and 
graceful motions are delightful to look upon, but decidedly tantalizing 
to the man whose desire is to collect. 

Before we plunge, then, into the stillness of the great primeval 
forest, let us follow that winding sandy road which leads through an 
old clearing, with here and there a patch of maize or field of the 
graceful mandioca, with now and again a little valley whose clear 
rivulet ripples happily between the moss-grown stones or glides across 
the sandy level of the road. Occasionally the road cuts through a 
spur of the forest that juts out into the open like a little promontory 
in the sea. And thus we shall have a variety of scene, and a 
constant recurrence of such spots as the butterflies delight in, and 
where we may watch and capture to our heart's content. 

The road that I propose to take you along is one of hundreds of 
such that may be found almost anywhere in the forest districts of the 
province of San Paulo, Brazil. At any season of the year we shall 
N.S., Vol. ix. Mar., 1884. 



12G 



The Na^turalist, 



find plenty to interest us in this summer land, for even in the winter, 
when in the early morning the ground may be covered wdth a slight 
hoar frost, the rays of the glorious tropic sun soon warm the air and 
bring out countless hosts of insects of all orders. But it is in the 
height of summer — from January to March — that the eye is gladdened 
with the glories and the ear charnaed with the ceaseless music of 
Nature's orchestra. It is then that the Morphos are in their prime» 
and the cicada fills the air wdth his joyous and piercing note. 

But before we start on our day's excursion, I will invite you to 
partake of breakfast in my rancho, an elegant mansion with mud 
walls and grass-thatched roof, and having the luxury of a boarded 
floor and a cooking stove — things not usually indulged in except by 
the civilized stranger in this primitive land. And perhaps it will be 
as well if each one of you considers the invitation to be to himself 
alone, for I am afraid that to accommodate you all at once I should 
have to add considerably to the size of my house. I can only offer 
you a plate of boiled beans and mandioca sawdust, with an egg or a 
stewed fowl ; unless it happens to be the day on which the baker 
passes, in which case I can add to the repast some sour French bread, 
which may be made more palatable by the addition of some yellow 
fat out of a tin, that is called by courtesy butter." But one thing 
I can offer you that is not to be found in England, and that is a good 
cup of coffee. No one knows the meaning of the term until he has 
been to Brazil. And now, having prepared ourselves for a hard day's 
work, and having our nets, bottles, boxes, &c., all in order, let us start 
off on our rambles. 

The first thing that attracts our attention is a composite plant, with 
clusters of white flowers which form a rich feeding ground for numbers 
of butterflies and diurnal moths ; especially we shall notice several 
species of Beliconidoe^ whose graceful shape and soft flight are so 
delightful and so entirely novel to the English eye. One species has 
rich broad patches of crimson on the upper wings, and a creamy band 
on the lower ; in another the crimson is replaced by diagonal stripes 
of creamy white, and the lower wings are of the deep blue- black that 
forms the ground colour of both species. We shall also probably find 
several species of Ithomiaj a lovely genus of the same group, whose 
transparent wings and dancing flight entitle them to be called the 
fairies of the woods. These delicate insects will often be found 
flitting from glade to glade in the depths of the forest, where they 
appear in perfect keeping with the surrounding stillness and shade, 
and one almost fancies them too ethereal to venture out into the light 



Jones : In the TkoI^ics. 



Ut 



of the open spaces. They are, in fact, essentially forest creatures, and 
are rarely met with in the plains away from their home in the woods. 
Numbers of clear-winged moths and allied species will be found accom- 
panying the butterflies in their morning meal, and vieing with them in 
the brilliancy of their colouring. One group of these which seem to 
represent our burnets, contains the most dazzlingly beautiful little 
creatures — perfect gems, in fact — that glow with ever-varying tint as 
they move and change the angle of the reflected light that flashes 
from their wings. Some of them almost appear as if they had 
been dipped in the pigments of some evanescent rainbow, and 
varnished over with the dew before the colours had time to depart, so 
brilliant are their tints. 

Tearing ourselves away from the rich harvest of this feeding ground, 
we proceed along the sandy road, being met at every step by swarms 
of gaily-coloured butterflies ; on the open spots where the banks are 
dried and parched by the already powerful rays of the sun, we shall 
make many good captures. Pt/rameis, reminding us of our own painted 
lady ; Junonia with its lovely peacock eyes, and many species of blues, 
hairstreaks and skippers. Of the latter group, there appears to be no 
end to the species, and indeed, I have rarely had a good day's hunt 
without being rewarded by one or two new species ; and these are, 
many of them, very difi'erent from the tiny dull skippers we are 
accustomed to at home. Here we find a giant, two inches and three 
quarters in expanse, of a beautiful greenish black, -with a white fringe 
round the edges of the wings. There we see a robust specimen, with 
three light brown velvet patches on the wings. Feeding on that purple 
flower are several yellow and black ones, with crimson head and tail.. 
By the side of the stream we are about to cross, we shall start off 
dozens of different kinds, all drinking on the wet sand, and some of 
them gay with metallic sheen, and brilliant colouring, blue, yellow, 
and red, and all adding by their merry and sprightly flight to the 
beauty of the scene. Within the woods the smaller and more sombre- 
coloured skippers delight to fly, generally having a favourite spot to 
which they return again and again, after a little game at hide and seek 
with their friends. But even among these, many are adorned with 
colours not to be found in our English groups. To give some idea of 
the abundance of the skippers, I may state that I have collected over 
120 species, within a radius of eight miles from San Paulo, nearly 
twice the number of all the British butterflies together. Some of them 
seem fully up to the humour of a practical joke, and delight to wait 
on the surface of some great sun-lit leaf, and suddenly dart out at a 



128 



The Naturalist. 



passing MoiyJio or Papilio, and then fly back to their favourite port, 
the majestic MorpJio taking no more notice of them than a selema 
mastiff does of a yelping cur. Sometimes I have had a merry skipper 
settle on the back of my hand, where he found food suitable to his 
palate, in the drops of perspiration brought out by the broiling sun. I 
am sorry to say that many butterflies are not at all refined in their 
tastes, and much prefer a meal off the dung of other animals to the 
nectar of the choicest flowers ; and I have often seen some lovely and 
delicate creature taking his breakfast on the filthy greasy coat of one- 
of the Italian navvies employed upon my work. The Faphlas are much 
addicted to these disgusting habits. 

The little streams that T have mentioned form most wonderful 
collecting grounds where they cross these sandy roads indeed I know 
of no more productive spots than one of these where the road is in 
forest. At mid-day, when the sun pours down perpendicularly on the 
wet sand, the butterflies congregate in myriads, settling on the ground 
and apijlying their trunks assiduously to the water. There are certain 
patches that seem to have an especial attraction, and on these they are 
so closely packed that they may be said to be like the Irishman's 
'^snipes" that were '^usually jostlin' one another." I once made a 
swoop at a cluster of a little white Terias^ just to see how many I could 
get into the net at once, and I counted fifty -two ! A large sulphur- 
coloured species [Catopsilia philea) may betaken in quantities on these 
damp places. Their appearance as they rest in companies of twelve to 
twenty, with their large wings standing up and often leaning over to 
one side, has a striking resemblance to a fleet of tiny yachts in full 
sail. And: PapiUos and Nymqjhalids without number will also be taken 
at the stream. A man may spend a very profitable day by sitting 
under the shade of a neighbouring tree, and sallying out every few 
minutes with his net. 

And now, as the heat has become rather trying, we may as well 
follow the suggestion ourselves, and have a little rest. But even here 
we shall have x>lenty to interest us and fill us with delight. First, we 
shall notice a great blue-bodied long-legged wasp lugging a huge spider 
up the bank on whicL we are sitting, running backwards with her 
heavy burden held tightly in her jaws. Finding the spider rather 
awkward to pull? through; the grass with his legs sprawling in all 
directions, she sets to work and nips them off one after another, and 
takes only the fat juicy body to He the food of the rising generation 
of grubs. Then we shall be bothered by the tickling of a lot of little 
tiny bees that are following the example of the skipper and having a 



Jones : In the Tropics. 



good meal off the backs of our hands. These bees are about half the 
size of the common house-fly, and have no stings, belonging to the 
Melipona group. Some of them make their nests in the ground, others 
in the hollow trunks of trees. The entrance to the nest is formed of 
:a resinous substance, and usually projects in a trumpet shape some 
little way from the surface of the tree or the ground. I remember 
once knocking off one of these trumpets that projected three or four 
inches from a bank at about the level of my head, not knowing 
what it was ; and before I had time to run, I had a swarm of bees in 
my hair, buzzing and burrowing in all directions, and rolling them- 
selves up in my hair. As I did not know at the time that they had 
no stings, I did not quite like the appearance of things, to say nothing 
of the sensation of these little bees rooting about my head. But I 
soon managed to get them all out, and was none the worse for the 
affair. These tiny bees make excellent honey, and their nests are much 
sought after by the Brazilian peasants. The sort that nests in the 
ground makes especially fine honey, quite clear and colourless, and of 
delicious flavour. Certain kinds of the tree bees are never molested, 
as the Brazilians say the honey is not fit to eat. This is probably 
from the bees collecting from some poisonous flowers. 

As we still enjoy the cool shade of our friendly tree, we hear away 
in the distance the strange cry of the arapowja or anvil bird, as it 
clangs away on the top of feome lofty pinnacle of the forest. At this 
distance the sound is pleasant enough, though close at hand it is harsh 
in the extreme. The Brazilians are very fond of keeping this bird 
caged, and the way in which it jerks out its ear-sliattering cry is 
excruciating. The only thing I can liken it to, if your imaginations 
are powerful enough to realise the combination, is a rusty hinge with a 
bad cough. A long sustained note of great volume and power, that the 
bird sometimes indulges in is not so objectionable; but, altogether, I 
think keeping arapongas within two miles of one's neighbour's house, 
is an offence against society, and ought to be put down by the law. 

But now, as the heat increases, the music of the birds begins to 
cease, and we hear only the sound of insect life. The cicadas are in 
their element under the fierce heat of the sun, and seem to be trying 
which can make the loadest noise. They begin with a complaining 
sort of whirr, on a decending scale, which is repeated at intervals, the 
interval becoming shorter and shorter each time, till at last the sound 
is almost continuous, giving one the idea of revolving machinery that 
is set in motion and gradually gains in speed ; then the insect suddenly 
breaks out into the most piercingly shrill note, that reminds ojje of 



The Natuealtst. 



the whistle of a locomotive. Indeed, so remarkable is the resemblance 
that once or twice since I have returned to England, I have suddenly 
been recalled to the tropic groves by the sound of an extra shrill rail- 
way whistle at a distance. I have heard it stated that the cicadas 
sometimes go on trying to out-do each other to such an extent, that 
at last they burst with the exertion. This fable has evidently arisen 
from the fact that the empty skins of the pupae, with a split down the 
thorax, through which the perfect insect has made its exit, are very 
commonly found attached to the trunks of the trees. 

Before leaving the subject of musicians, I may mention that I have 
observed that several kinds of caterpillars (species of Ferophora) have 
the power of making a low musical note, so low indeed that it can 
only be heard when close to the ear. In one species {P. sanguinolentd) 
it is an intermittent note, the intervals varying from one to several 
seconds. Though the note is so faint, the vibrations can be distinctly 
felt when the larval case is held in the fingers. In another species the 
sound is similar to the above, but is continuous, lasting for several 
seconds at a time. Another again is intermittent as in the first species. 
Once when I had some of these caterpillars in my room, for several 
nights I heard this curious note as soon as I laid my head on my 
pillow. For the first two nights I tried in vain to find out where the 
sound came from ; but on the third night I discovered a cocoon spun 
in a fold of the pillow-slip, and on examination it proved to be one of 
the Perophora cater^jillars that had wandered away from his food and 
taken up his abode in the above situation ! 

And now that we have rested a little, let us pursue our ramble over 
the next spur, and down into the lovely little valley with its waving 
fields of maize, betv^^een whose stately stalks the ground is sheltered 
and kept damp by the great leaves of the pumpkin, that already shows 
promise of a rich harvest of its gigantic golden fruit. x\s we descend 
we shall add to our captures at almost every step. Butterflies, beetles, 
gaily coloured Hemiptera, grasshoppers, Hymenoptera and .Diptera — 
some of the latter of large size — m.eet the eye at every moment, and as 
we approach the stream that spreads out into a miniature swamp at 
the bottom, thousands of dragon-flies fire the air and remind us of 
home, for there is more resemblance between these and our own 
species than is the case in the other orders. 

And now we will strike off to the right along that shady lane that 
leads into the depths of the forest. This is the favourite haunt of two 
species of Morplio^ M. Hercules and M. Epidroi^liis^ both of them giants, 
f\ud the latter of exquisite beauty. These v/ill be seen in great 



Jones : In the Tropics. 



131 



numbers lazily flapping along the lane, and occasionally having a 
dance with one another. Three or four of them circling round and 
round, and glistening in the rays of the golden sunshine that falls in 
patches through the shade, form a picture of great loveliness, and one 
which will remain for years in our memories and help to enliven many 
a dull and dreary hour in this dark and cheerless climate of ours. 
Later on in the season, near the tangled mass of taquara," or native 
bamboo, if we come again on a bright summer day we shall be 
dazzled by that still more lovely species M. j^ga, the whole upper 
surface of whose wings is of such a brilliant metallic blue that each 
motion flashes out blue light, and the insect seems almost too beautiful 
to belong to this every-day world of ours. And he knows his beauty, 
and is very careful of it ; for so afraid is he of its getting damaged 
that he only flies during bright sunshine, and if a cloud passes over 
the sun he seems to fear the rain that might come, and immediately 
settles under some leafy shade till the sunshine comes again, and he 
can start once more on his airy gambols. I use the masculine pronoun 
purposely, for it is only the male that is so gorgeously adorned. The 
female is a very sombre creature in comparison with her mate. 

The trees at each side of the shady lane are many of them laden 
with epiphytal plants. Orchids, arums, ferns of graceful form, delicate 
cactuses, and many different kinds of BromeUacece grow in profusion, 
and make each branch a garden in itself. These air plants have a 
special charm to an eye that has been reared in a temperate climate, 
where it is accustomed to see only plants that grow in the ground ; and 
a great part of the beauty of a tropical forest is derived from them. 
The Bromelias are especially interesting to the entomologist, as each 
one forms a little reservoir of water in which larvse of insects are 
found that exist in no other situation. The water stored up between 
the leaves of these plants soon becomes half putrid with decaying 
leaves and forest dust that accumulate in it, and it is anything but 
pleasant to turn over one of these cisterns on to oneself when climbing 
the trees to search for the botanical and entomological treasures they 
are laden with. Some of the plants grow to a large size, and contain 
several pints of water — enough to make a man feel very uncomfortable 
if it is suddenly discharged down the back of his neck ! 

But if we begin to botanise as well as to entomologise, we shall 
never get back to the rancho ; and a darkening of the western sky and 
a distant growl warn us that it is quite time to think of getting under 
cover, so we will walk on a little faster and try to reach the rancho 
by a different road from the one we came by, that leads nearly all the 



132 



The Naturalist. 



way through the woods, before the afternoon storm reaches us. These 
storms are of almost daily occurrence during the hot season, and 
usually come on between three and five o'clock, though I have expe- 
rienced some heavy ones in the early morning, and when these take 
place we may reckon on rain for the rest of the day. But the regular 
afternoon storm is generally of short duration, and leaves the evening 
fine, cool, and refreshing after the overpowering heat of the day. The 
sun rises in a cloudless sky ; about ten o'clock light fleecy clouds 
appear and float gently by, gradually accumulating in great masses as 
they grow. At one or two o'clock they form large towers of cumulus 
around the horizon, and as the day wears on an occasional flash is seen 
to dart through them, illuminating their crags and crevices with a 
glorious dazzling white. Meanwhile the wall of darkness from 
beneath grows blacker, and rises higher and higher until the 
outskirts of the cloudy pall, fringed and torn with the tension of 
the electric charge, obscure the sun and cast a grateful shade 
upon the parched soil. Then the roll of thunder is heard, a 
mighty wind bows down the swaying trees, a few great raindrops 
patter on the outstretched leaves of the wild banana and the huge 
Cecropias, and in a moment the fury of the storm is upon us, 
Umbrellas and waterproofs are of little avail in such storms as these, 
the former only acting as a sort of sieve that cuts the huge drops into 
spray, and the latter collecting the little streams into a few great rivers 
that flow pleasantly into your boots. When 1 have been caught in 
one of these tornadoes I have made up my mind that I was going to 
get wet, and I have seldom been mistaken. In the midst of the 
turmoil the lightning is almost incessant, and the thunder one con- 
tinuous roar, But this only lasts for ten minutes or a quarter of an 
hour, then one or two flashes and simultaneous deafening explosions 
announce the end, the rain lessens, and the storm has passed away, 
leaving the air cool and fresh, and all Nature rejoicing. Then the 
evening concert begins, the crickets leading off the orchestra of toads 
and frogs with their endless variety of wind instruments and drums, 
Bye-and-bye, as the sun sinks below the horizon, and the short tropic 
twilight deepens into night, the concert room is lit by countless hosts 
of fire-flies flashing out their tiny lamps in rhythmic pulsations, with 
here and there a great green electric light carried on the shoulders of 
a huge Mater beetle sailing majestically through the forest glades, and 
we enter on the glories of a tropic night. 

But all this time, while I have been talking about thunder-storms, 
W§ will suppose that we have been walking briskly on, and can now 



Jones : In the Tropics. 



133 



see the friendly smoke curling up from the chimney of my rancho, 
showing that my man Benedicto has not forgotten that we shall be 
ready for another plate of beans after our long walk ; and as the tirst 
great raindrops splash upon the thirsty leaves we step indoors, and 
congratulate ourselves that we are ^' just home in time." 

And now, as I have only described the delightful side of the picture, 
perhaps it is only fair that I shonld mention some of the disagreeables 
of a day in the tropics. The first thing that will occur to you is 
snakes. Well, there are plenty of them, no doubt, and some of them 
are very deadly ; but for one venomous one you will see twenty harm- 
less ones, and all of them get out of your way as fast as they can, and 
seem much more afraid of you than you are of them. Of course there 
always is the danger of treading upon a snake coiled up on the ground, 
and in this case he is sure to strike at your leg, and I always on this 
account wear good strong boots and leather leggings when on my 
excursions in the woods. But I can only say that, in nearly nine 
years' residence in Brazil, such an accident never happened to me, and 
I have never been really alarmed by a snake, excepting once when I 
was climbing over a wall on the further side of which the ground was 
nearly level with the top : and as my chin reached this level I saw the 
head of a great snake about six feet long, waving backwards and 
forwards within a foot or two of my face. I need hardly say I changed 
my mind about getting over that wall. 

What I do object to much more than snakes is the army of 
mosquitos which in certain districts do their best to make life a 
burden. But even with these I have been very fortunate, and have 
not been much molested by them in my forest life. In the towns they 
are bad enough, and sleeping without a mosquito curtain is out of the 
question excepting during the cool winter months. But, after all, this 
pest is not confined to the tropics, and we need not go quite so far 
as Brazil to meet with it. 

An insect that has given me a great amount of trouble is the . 
Carrapato — a minute tick that buries its jaws in your flesh and causes 
most distressing irritation. These little beasts are about the size of a 
pin's head, and hang in clusters of a thousand or so on the leaves and 
twigs of the bushes in the campos that are inhabited by cattle, and as 
the unwary victim touches the mass they drop upon him and spread 
all over him. If detected at once, you can brush them ofl" by violent 
switching with a bunch of twigs ; but if you go on your way without 
noticing the enemy, they will soon find their way to your skin and will 
annoy you for days afterwards, unless you have your clothes well 



The Naturalist. 



smoked on a wood fire, which will soon clear out the little beasts. 
Fortunately this species is not found in the forest, and we need not 
always be on the look-out for them excepting in the campos ; and they 
only appear for a few months— from April to July, or thereabouts. 
There are two other species of Carrapatos that I have met with, one of 
them being about a quarter of an inch in diameter ; but these are not 
80 troublesome as the small ones, as they are solitary in their habits, 
and are much easier to get hold of when they get hold of you. 

Then we have the "jigger,'* that lively little flea that delights to 
burrow under the nails of the toes ; and there are several kinds of biting 
flies that keep the business going while the mosquito is at rest in the 
daytime. But all these are only just to remind us that even life in 
that land of sunshine is not perfect bli&s ; and though at the time they 
are decidedly disagreeable, the memory of them soon fades, and 
leaves only pure delight in recalling the incidents of a day's ramble 
in the tropics." 

28th May, 1883. 

NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 

( Continued.) 
By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

UiTENHAGE has another attraction for insects in the shape of 
burly oak trees, planted by the primitive Dutch settlers, and sur- 
rounding the town a fine bush supplies sufficient allurement for 
more timorous and less civilised fauna. The pretty Cyclopides metis 
abounds in the gardens. So does Diadema Bolina and Papilio 
Bemoleus. Datiais chrysippus is common, and Acrea horta likewise. In 
Port Elizabeth these butterflies are comparative visitants, and I might 
mention dozens of similar instances to stamp Uitenhage.one of the first 
collecting fields in the Eastern Province of South Africa. Query : 
Where are our collectors ? You give the riddle up, and so do I. The 
term Cape ennui is a misnomer for Cape laziness perhaps. We recognise 
a defeat. We deplore its legitimacy. W"e hope for a remedy, but we are 
not wide awake to emergency, to rouse ourselves from lethargy. Let 
us fill our pockets with gold dust, and then we may attend to the soul 
elevation department. This is not our home. Why waste money and 
time in adorning it or embellishing our brains. Two extremes meet. 
We are either rashly speculative or merely callous. I submit the 
argument with the best intentions. Dispute it who can. And yet I 



Bairstow . Natural History Notes from South Africa. 1^5 



grant that it is difficult to get away from filthy lucre ; but if a natioii 
progresses, the ingredients of success are scribbled with a touch of 
scientific warp, of artistic weft, and steeped in the dye of attraction, 
when considering the Cape. Offer an interesting programme, and play 
to a crowded house. Announce a sermon on Dry bones, and sing 

O solitude, where are thy charms'?" 

We are behind the times, and Channing's inferences, science has 
now left her retreats, her shades, her selected company of votaries, 
and with familiar tone begun the work of instructing the race" ranks in 
the pages of history. I feel constrained to pen these words ; not all 
I would, but all I dare. We are deficient in self-reliance and activity 
in promoting and dispersing knowledge ; but brighter days, I trust, 
are coming. Three years since I visited the Port Elizabeth Museum. 
It reeked in filth ! Change and decay in all around I saw. Delapidated 
specimens groaned dustily of cruel inattention. Those which escaped 
ruin might even then have constituted the nucleus of a good collection. 
Now mark ! This museum is within the Town Hall, and the 
jurisdiction, I think, of a club termed Athenaeum — whatever that 
may signify; — more properly, "Amateur Theatrical." The key of 
the door was kept under a dirty cocoa-nut mat. I paid another visit 
just lately to the P.E. Museum, and if I say it was a disgrace to any 
town, I speak mildly, most sober truth, and disregarding persiflage 
or peevish utterances. Nothing succeeds like success. The A.T." 
club flourishes, and our museum makes a capital dressing-room for 
would-be Hamlets, but it's rather hard on slighted donors of natural 
history specimens. 

Legal technicalities are said to bar the way of renovation. More's 
the pity on't. 

My next expeditions yielded many species of Bomhycidce^ principally 
Saturnida, in their larval state, and some of them attain to enormous 
dimensions, but appear, for the most part, as social or company grubs, 
playing sad havoc amongst the leaves of their food-plants, I have not 
found many of them to be silk producers, at which I am astonished ; 
but there is an ugly fellow [Borocera postica) feeds on mimosa that 
weaves a cocoon and distributes its urticating hairs amongst the web. 
Liparis aurijlua is out of the running, when scratched against this 
tyrant. Blessed man, who never fingered his Esauic skin or habita- 
tion ! The days of Inquisition are over, otherwise the ingenuity bora 
of fiendish inhumanity must certainly have clutched a novel torture — 
rubbing the naked backs of miserable captives with larval hairs from 



136 



The Naturalist. 



the Cape.* Silk from these cocoons is of good qiiality, and possibly of 
commercial value when the grubs are persuaded to oblige us by omit- 
ting filamentary adniixtions. I have not been fortunate enough to 
rear them from chrysalids. All our Bomhyces^ on account of obstacles 
needless to enumerate, are troublesome to manage, and where success- 
ful, the breeder is not assured of satisfactory conclusions, as lovely 
grubs do not always realise lovely imagines. A few species of the 
genus Satimiia grow to an immense size before the final change ensues. 
The two larvae I have sketched from preserved specimens are ex- 
tremely common, gregarious, and destructive. Another large and 
beautiful caterpillar is Autheroea cijtherea, very common. 

•f Ayiilieroea menippe (Fig 1, pi. 8), if partial to field or garden crops, 
would rank conspicuously amongst our deadly enemies, and Bunoea 
Caffraria (fig. 2), if not so plentiful, is equally destructive. The latter 
possesses spines like fretful porcupine,'' the former tridentate 
forks (fig. 1a). I have been obliged to stuff my giants with cotton 
wool in order to preserve them. I struggled perspiringly to inflate 
one for an artist's model, so you need not smile captiously at the term 
cotton w^ool. With unprofessional impatience I puffed and snorted, 
blew, and panted, and then tried Clarke's spray producer, ^' after 
Porritt," all to no purpose ; nothing had inflated but my cheeks. I 
staggered to a seat exhausted and sad, appropriately yelling " Cater- 
pillar be bio wed !" The little whisper of faith suggested historical 
Alfred, of heroic stick-to-it fame, of brave Kobert the Bruce, and, lastly, 
the example of some modern Child-teacher" writ in most encouraging 
words, ''Try, try, try again," &c. Keep it up!'' said the sprite, 
* Thanks ! not if I know it," responded yours very respectfully : and 
.stuffed my specimens remained. The larger Nodurni are naturally 
pretty well known, and fairly represented in S.A. Museum. Our 
Sphinges are numerous and varied, and my old friend A, Atropos 
poses in Port Elizabeth as a vine pest and a hive. 

(To he continued.) 



Notes from Cambridge.— As far as the nocturnal lepidoptera are 
concerned, 1883 has been a very unprofitable season here, and most of 
our local insects have been either exceedingly scarce or conspicuous by 
their absence. I worked hard at pupa digging last autumn and during 

* Fig. 3. (PL 8) represents one of the hairs of a grand Geometer larva 
captured in the Perie Bush. The specimen figured is slightly magnified at its 
apex, which is of a lovely Prussian blue ; larva, bright yellow with black and 
irregular bands, or colliding spots interspersed on surface with short hairs. 

t Authority —Trimcn. 



Notes and QuEniES. 



the present winter, but, I think, never with such little success. I have 
really taken nothing worth mentioning. Papilio Machaon seems to be" 
disappearing. I remember the time (and that not so very many years- 
ago) when I used to take it in the very suburbs of Cambridge itself, but 
I have not seen it lately. It may sbill be found in the fens, although far 
less plentiful than of yore. Argynnis Aglaia, A . Eiiphrosyne, and Thecla 
heUdce are of general occurrence in this county, but I did not meet with 
either of them last year. Melitcea Artemis and Besperia comma I have' 
not seen at all of late years. A piebald specimen of the water vole 
{ Arvicola amphibius) was taken in the vicinity of a village near here last 
September ; and a perfectly white mole {Talpa Europcea) was caught 
about the same time and near the same place. — Alb^:rt H. Waters^ 
Cambridge. [I saw Papilio Machaon in abundance on Wicken 
Fen, Cambridgeshire, at the end of May, 1882.— G.T. P.] 

Lastrcea cristata. — Lastrcea cristata was, I believe, first found in York- 
shire on Thorne Moor, by my now aged friend, William Casson, of Thorne. 
I have a fine frond of his gathering from that station in my herbarium,- 
with the date of 1856 attached. He met with it, I believe, in consider- 
able abundance. If Mr. John Hardy, of Manchester, found this species 
on Thorne Waste before that date, my supposition with regard to Mr. 
Casson being the first finder of the fern in Yorkshire, is, of course, a 
mistake. — J. Backhouse, West Bank, York, Feb. 7th. 

Where are the Insects ?" — rl do not know if Mrs. Hutchinson, of 
Leominster, has seen the Naturalist for December, but in a letter received 
from that lady to-day, she adds a P.S. as follows : — We are so over- 
stocked with small birds — they rise in flocks of thousands — that all insect 
life that they eat is cleared away. We rarely now see a butterfly or moth 
here ; the last two years have been blanks." On the contrary, Mr. Bond 
writes — I do not know where all the birds have got to. We rarely see 
anything except sparrows and tom tits." I can only suppose that in the 
latter case all the insect life at Staines has been eaten up, and the birds 
have had to find fresh quarters. This idea seems strengthened by the 
fact that the tits and sparrows Lave remained; the former are able to 
hack their lurking prey from their holes, and the latter can subsist a 
great deal upon household refuse. I should think the eff'ect of this in. 
time would be to drive the insectivorous birds entirely from the country. 
— S. L. MosLEY, Beaumont Park, Huddersfield, Feb. 9th. 

^¦yVe notice that a contributor to the February number of the Entom- 
ologist, writing from Upper Norwood, takes Mr. Mosley's view im 
attributing the scarcity of insects to the increase of birds.— Eds. Nat 

Epeira diadema and Salticus scenictis m Yorkshire. —Noticing records^ 
of these species for Yorkshire at p. 84 of vol. vii. , induces me to mention^ 
that on the 3rd Sept., 1883, I took a specimen of Epeira diadema (female)^ 
on a rock on the side of Ingleborough, about half-way up the mountain,. 



138 



The NATURAList. 



just beyond Ribbleheacl Station ; it almost exactly matched the rock in 
colour. In the year 1881 I took several specimens of Salticus scenicus, 
the zebra hunting-spider, in a greenhouse in York. These additional 
localities may perhaps interest some one interested in the geographical 
range of this group of animals.— Geo. W. Oldfield, Harrogate, 
13th Feb., 1884. 

Supplement to the Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire. — Messrs. W. 
Eagle Clarke and W. Denison Roebuck, Leeds, are preparing a supple- 
ment to their Handbook of the Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire," and 
would be glad to receive notes of additions or corrections to that work, or 
notices of the occurrence of any species of quadrupeds, birds, reptiles, or 
fishes in Yorkshire, which their friends may be pleased to communicate* 
As they wish to publish the supplement in the April magazines, it is hoped 
that information may be sent in immediately. 

REVIEW. — Transactions of the Huddersfield Naturalists' Society. — 
Part I." — We are very pleased to find that the Huddersfield Naturalists' 
Society has decided to publish annually a part of ^' Transactions." Part 
I., just issued, is before us, and we congratulate the Society on the result 
of the beginning of its venture. The Part contains the Annual Report of 
the Society for 1883, including the work done by the Geological, 
Botanical, Vertebrate, and Entomological Sections, from which we find 
that much useful work has been accomplished. The report of the last- 
mentioned section, however, does not give an adequate idea of what was 
done in Entomology during the year ; for few, we imagine, will concur 
with the remark that ^' the feature of the year has been the abundance of 
the Autumn moths at lamps," when the fact remains that seven species of 
lepidoptera were discovered quite new to the district (three of them 
indeed iiew to the county) ; yet, although it is a good many years 
since such an occurrence took place in the Huddersfield district, no 
allusion whatever is made in the report either to the circumstance or to 
any of the species. The names of all new additions to the fauna and 
flora ought surely to be most prominent items in the reports on the work 
done in the district. Then again, the report says, several species which 
have only occurred singly before, were this year extremely abundant." 
We are much interested to know what species are here alluded to, as we 
certainly neither heard of nor noticed anything of the kind ourselves. 
The feature of the Part, however, is A Catalogue of the Lepidoptera 
found in the Huddersfield District." There are lists of both the Macros 
and the Micros, and as they seem to be complete and accurate so far as the 
district is known, they will doubtless prove of great value to the younger 
lepidopterists of the Society and neighbourhood. The summary gives 
339 Macros and 327 Micros, or a total of 666 species as having been taken 
in the district. The Macros have been well worked up, but the number 
of Micros will no doubt be considerably increased as years go by. The 
price of the Part to non-members of the Society is Is. 6d.. and may be 
had from the Secretary, Mr. S. L. Mosley, Beaumont Park, Huddersfield. 



KoTES AND Queries. 



OBITUARY. — William Buckler. — Lepidopterists throughout the 
country will have heard with intense grief of the sudden death of Mr. 
William Buckler, of Lumley House, Emsworth. The warmth and 
enthusiasm of his correspondence endeared him to every one with whom 
he had such an acquaintance, and the formation of a friendship made with 
him in this way was, we suppose, claimed with pride by almost every 
lepidopterist in Britain who had spent a few years in earnest study of the 
life histories of this group of the British insects. For twenty-five years 
Mr. Buckler devoted his energies to the delineation of the larvae of our 
British lepidoptera, and not only with his beautiful figures, but in his 
lucid and careful descriptions (which are so w^ell known to every reader 
of the Entomologists' Monthly Magazine "), he had no rival. Our own 
correspondence with him commenced early in 1868, and we have just been 
looking over the mass of information about larvae contained in the letters 
received from him after that date. Truly he died in harness," for the 
first paper, extending to nearly seven pages, in the current number of the 
''Ento. Mo. Mag." (February, 1884), on ''The Natural History of 
Aglossa pinguinalis,^' is written by him under date January 2nd, 1884." 
A week later, on January 9th, he had passed away, from an attack of 
bronchitis, at the age of 69. It is reported his figures of larvae will 
probably be published by the Ray Society, and that Society we are sure 
coald not be engaged on better work. — G. T. P. 



^amfall fox ^nmm^. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 
sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

heaviest 
Fan. 




Days 


1884. 


1883. 


Fall. 


Huddersfield (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 

5-75 


21 


2-93 


*33-74 


22 


1-26 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


4-04 


18 


4-04 


1-86 t 


23 


0-70 


HORSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


3-77 


19 


3-77 


2-46 t 


22 


0-92 


Halifax...(F. G. S. Eawson) 


365 


8-72 


24 


8-72 


8-40 


22 


1-80 


Barnsley ... (Dr Sadler)... 


350 


3-68 


18 


3-68 


3-37 


23 


0-82 


Ingbirchworth (Mr. Taylor) 


853 


7-32 


21 


7-32 


6-55 


22 


1-50 


Wentworth Castle (Mr. 

Fisher) 


520 


4-29 


17 


4 29 


4-69 


23 


0-85 


Goole (J. Harrison).. 


25 


3-60 


18 


3-60 


212 


23 


0-78 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


2.82 


14 


2-82 


1-51 § 


23 


0-69 


ScARBORO' (A. Rowntree)... 


130 


2-99 


17 


. 1-1611 




23 


0-56 


Thirsk...(W. Gregson) 


100 


4-42 


17 


4-42 




3 


0-89 



* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-82. 
t Average of 30 years, 1853-62, & 1865-84. J Average of 15 years, 1870-84. 
§ Average of 34 years, 1850-83. [| Average of 18 years. 



Heckmondwike Naturalists' Society. — Meeting, January 26th, 1884^ 
— The president (Mr. J. A. Erskine Stuart) gave an interesting report on 
the natural history of the month, exhibiting a variety of floral specimens, 
wild and from the garden, forwarded by Dr. C. Stuart, of Chrinside, 
Berwick. Reports of local ornithology and botany were also given by 
the members ; amongst other records was that of a thrush's nest, coh^ 
taining four eggs, having been found on Dec. 24th, 1883, at Overthorpe, 
near Thornhill. The president afterwards read a paper on Diseases of 
Plants." 

HuDDERSFiELD Naiuralists' Society. — Meeting, Feb. 16th, Mr. J. 
Shaw in the chair. — Mr. T. W. Woodhead named a number of plants in 
flower. Mr. Mosley stated that he had just returned from Rainworth 
Lodge, in Nottinghamshire, where he had been staying, sketching var- 
ieties of birds from the very rich collection of the owner, Mr. T. 
Whitaker, F.L.S., for the purpose of publishing figures of them in his 
work on British Birds." He exhibited his sketch book, containing 
over 70 figures, most of them exceedingly rich ; he also exhibited an egg 
of the tufted duck, presented to him by Mr. Whitaker, and taken on the 
ponds at Bain worth Lodge, the only place in Britain where this bird is 
known regularly to breed. 

Manchester Cryftogamic Society. — Dr. B. Carrington, F.B.S.E., 
in the chair. — The hon. sec. exhibited Continental specimens (in fruit) of 
Tortnla paludosa, a species of moss which has recently been added to the 
British flora, barren specimens of the same having been found in Wales. 
The Continental specimens have been gathered by Dr. J. B. Wood and 
Professor W. P. Schimper, in Switzerland, 1872. Mr. W. H. Pearson 
read a short paper on a collection of Hepatics from Norway and Sweden, 
which had been sent to him by Prof. N. C. Kindberg, of Sweden ; 
altogether, about 60 species were enumerated, amongst the rarest being 
Gymnomitrium coralloides, Scapania suhalpina, Jung. Kunzei, and J". 
saxicola. Specimens were then distributed by Mr. Pearson ; he also 
exhibited specimens of Scapania irrigua (new to Derbyshire), collected 
at Kinder on November last, by Messrs. Whitehead and Holt. Mr. 
Pearson brought before the the notice of the society Professor Masso- 
lengo's recent work on the Uridinece Vereyiensis. Mr. Cash exhibited a 
moss new to Europe, Fontinalis Bavani, which had been discovered in 
1882, and sent to him by M. de Buysson, a French corresponding 
member of the society. The moss appears to have a more delicate habit 
than any British species of the genus. Mr. Stanley exhibited under 
the microscopic, the spores and spore cases of Selaginella ; he also exhib- 
ited a micro-photograph of Thomas Brittain, a former vice-president of 
the society. Mr. George Burgess exhibited a number of freshly gathered 
mosses from Ingleton and Derbyshire. — T. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 




NATURALIST, PI. viii. 



JR. BBOWN, 
Publisher , Hufidersfield . 



NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 
( Contmued.) 

By S. D. Baiestow, F.L.S. 

Note. — Owing to the absence of both Editors from Huddersfield, Plate 
VIII. was accidentally omitted from the last number, but is given this month ; 
and the last sentence in Mr. Bairstow's paper (p. 136) ought to have appeared 
as the beginning of the present part. 

Our Sphinges are numerous and varied, and my old friend A, Atropos 
poses in Port Elizabeth as a vine pest and a hive-robber, whilst by 
many up-country agriculturalists it is held in terror and superstitious 
awe. 

The Chelonid(B contain some lovely species, several of which I doubt 
not hybernate as larvae, as at home. One of our most striking moths, 
Pais decora, I have taken during the season, flies over grassy plains, and 
is readily boxed. It resembles Abraxas grossulariata, both in flight and 
metamorphoses. The larva, pupa, and imago exhibit coincident forms 
of colour. Several of the Zygcenidce swarm where they locate, and are 
always welcome friends. At Rondebosch — a delightful retreat near 
Cape Town — I saw thousands of. them pursuing their revels beneath 
the glare of a fiery sun. Procris nebulosa is not uncommon, but a moth 
(sp. ?) I was pleased to greet as a Procris never fell to my net in the old 
country. I have not yet discovered a solitary Hepialus,'^ but should 
suppose the genus is represented. To speak of Geometers, Noctuas, 
and Micros — 

I would if I could, but I can't, 

If I could when I would, then I dar'nt. 

To integrate such a history necessitates the combined eiforts and 
researches of a complete nation of lepidopterists. Monographic 
mention elevates one to insult the rest. Mr. Spiller mentions a few 
Natalian mothsf that are recorded also from Great Britain, and I 
notice a species of Plusia, closely allied to gamma. 

The hemipterous fauna of South Africa, says Dr. Buchanan White, 
F.L.S. , is " pretty well worked, J although a great deal remains to be 
N.S., Vol. ix. Apr., 1884. 

* Since penning this, Sepialus antarcticus is registered from Cape Town in 
the S.A. Museum Blue Book. 

t S. ConvolvuU, S. Celerio, C. Nerii, A. Atropos, D. Fulohella, S. Sacraria^ 
Heliothis Armigera, [Ent., vol. xiii., p. 83.) 

X The only book on this order known to me is Stahl's Hemiptera Africaner ^ 
which covers the entire continent. 



142 



The Naturalist. 



done, especially amongst the smaller species." Such a summary applies 
to the majority of natural orders. Large insects as curios, readily 
find their way to other countries, and animals which tickle the drum 
of human amazement are unearthed from their native habitats. We 
are neither deficient in stinging bugs nor stinking bugs, lovely bugs, 
ugly bugs, and noisy bugs. I submitted a small collection of them to 
Dr. White, gathered haphazard in different parts. One of our most 
interesting bugs, by reason of its leafy shape, which bars the way of 
detection, is Phyllomorplia paradoxa^ Sparm. I took one on my coat 
sleeve a short time ago, and have seen several belonging to other 
naturalists. The specimen I sent to Dr. White came to grief en route, 
but I have since ensured its name in accordance. Dr. White names 
also the following species : — Redumm erythrocnemisy Germ., a powerful 
biter ; Lygoens elegans, Wolf., a pretty thing, common on Ornithogalum, 
&c. ; Pseudojlata postica. Spin., a delicate green Homop., extremely 
local ; Scantius Forsteri, F. ; Mictis curvipes, F. ; and a water bug, 
Appasus luridusj Germ., " occurs also in Egypt," White. We have a fair 
number of Cicadm^ of yell-erlasting fame. Dr. White notes Platypleura 
hirtipennis, var. b., and P. stridula probably, though not altogether 
agreeing with it. 

The AracJinidcB differ materially from the foregoing, inasmuch as they 
have scarcely been studied at all. This is the more strange when we 
reflect how much of interest is absorbed in the one word spider, and 
how ignorant we remain of the habits of scorpions and of ticks, three 
families classified together but infinitely apart. What connecting link 
exists between the two former is vaguely defined, and their homologies 
are questionable. Those who have paid any attention to the economy 
of the scorpion would be astonished when told that science places the 
beast on the same platform with the spider. To see a life-to-life 
encounter between a Tarantula (?) and its supposed brother is but to 
increase the wonder. One fights like the condensed phantoms of all 
Furies. The other more calmly awaits, sneak that it is, until weakness 
intervenes, when it spurs to the rife contest, and a spider's requiem is 
pronounced. But it seems to me that classification of the future will 
depend not upon the habits of animals, relationship of economies, or 
forms, but upon affinities of internal structure, and comparative resem- 
blance of vital organs. Dr. D. Astley Cresswell, during a recent visit 
to the Colony, collected and took with him some living scorpions for 
anatomical purposes, but I have not yet learned whether he succeeded 
in his endeavour. We shall score one for Science when the relative 
positions of scorpions and crustaceans^ are indelibly fixed and 
generically defined. 



Batkstow : Natural History Notes from South Africa. 143 

Mens. Eug. Simon, to whom I forwarded a small number of S. A. 
Arachnidce^ remarks in the preface to his list — " All your spiders are of 
great interest. A genus Colophon^ recently described by Rev. 0. P. 
Cambridge, is new to me, and another is new to science, and allied to 
Themisoides of South America The scorpions are also good." 

That much sound work remains to be done in this most attractive 
order, the following list, from an eminent naturalist who makes it his 
study and delight, will certainly demonstrate. 1 give it verbatim after 
M. Simon. 

SPIDERS. 

Colophon Natalensis^ 0. P. Cambr. (one specimen) ; Nov. gen., allied 
to Themisoides (two specimens) ; Lyiola pulea ; Neniga ; Phlegra, sp. 
ignota ; Drassis, sp, ig. ; Palpimamis, sp. ig. ;• Misumena, sp. ig.\ Tho- 
misus, sp. ig. [ptdla) Selenops, sp,ig.\ Eresus Africanus, 0. Koch, 
female ; Lithyphantus, sp. ig. (f. sp.) 

SCORPIONS. 

Loimura, sp. ig. ; Battsus, sp. ig.^ probably villosus, Peters. Lityus 
lineatus, C. Koch. 

I have heard many travellers speak of dangers in South Africa. 
Tigers, reptiles, &c., &c. I do not believe one word of it. Big game 
is timid, wild animals flee at man's approach. Ticks are far stronger 
foes. You cannot shoot, spear, crush them. You are powerless. 
Walking or sitting, they inhabit your trousers. Sleeping they inhabit 
your flesh. Collector, they infest your beetles and bees, they appro- 
priate your shells. Botanist, touch not that flower ! Glorious Protea 
periifolia, tempt him not so tantalizingly. Your fluffy beauty is dis- 
torted with a myriad ticks. Your envelope contains a pandemonium 
of insect horrors. If I pluck you from your native velot, your parasites 
will suck my native blood and smear my native legs, and I can only 
pomade them out after the damage is done — for remonstrance is in 
vain. 

This insect phlebotomizing is possibly designed to maintain the 
balance of human strength. Dame Nature is more intimately ac- 
quainted with a3sculapian tactics than we are, and she has some motive 
for designing blood-sucking quacks, to practise in tropical or sub- 
tropical countries. Her human subjects are at liberty, notwithstanding, 
to kick against the pricks when they are sharply pointed. I have 
assigned to the Arachnida a very subordinate place in my list. Lovers 
of the order may justifiably give it a more elevated footing. The 



The Naturalist. 



remarkable or attractive neuropterous insects of Soutliern Africa were 
popularised long ago, and very few amateur collectors reach home un- 
represented with a formidable ant-lion or dragon-fly. LihelMce of all 
sizes and colours abound, not only near the banks of streams and 
rivers, but on upland flats in time of drought, when a glimpse of half- 
a-pint of water, fresh or stagnant, would seem a miracle. We have 
also innumerable species of PTiryganidce, whose architectural skill is 
never at a nonplus, and I possess a few gnat-like creatures yet undeter- 
mined. But to conclude my brief sketch of impressionable insect- 
ography without an allusion to our wonderful termites, even at the risk 
of desecrating Mr. Smeathman's sanctum, I am powerless. The world 
is fond of change. Fashion propels animation — animation, fashion. 
Any sort of a social lion will answer the purpose if that lion becomes 
popular. When Londoners are really hard-pressed for a novelty, 
let them bribe authorities at the Zoo to import a shipment of 
termite ant-hills. Provided all goes well I guarantee a splendid hit 
if an evacuation can be managed at the approach of sightseers. I 
have seen one flight of termites, and I count that moment one of the 
iiappiest in my life. They came not in myriads but in unceasing 
streams. 

They fell to earth I know not where." 

Mr. J. Martin, of Swansea, a recent visitor to this country, stayed 
for some time near the Katberg, and had ample opportunity of 
watching their habits. I received several specimens by post, they had 
dropped their wings in transit, excepting one which retained the left 
posterior until its death. He told me that when he plunged his stick 
into some of their abodes, he found them ready for swarming. A few 
months ago I visited the farm of a friend near Maitland Mines. 
Arriving early in the morning, I discovered many termites on the 
ground and in the river, and numbers of birds^'snapping them up with 
avidity. Whilst we were breakfasting a gentleman remarked that 
within a couple of hours of their appearance he could not find a 
solitary specimen. This was not entirely my own experience, but 
almost. Mr. Martin made some most valuable notes on the habits of 
termites, and I should be glad to read them in due course in the pages 
of the Naturolid, 

We do not derive serious inconvenience from white ants in this 
immediate district ; but they are a complete pest in some parts of the 
country. L'hermite de Winterhoek writes me as follows : — The only 
extraordinary symptom of activity which I have observed lately, was 



Bairstow : Natural History Notes from South Africa. 145 

in the case of termites or white ants, which are, during the warm 
season, such a pest in this country. It is very seldom during the 
winter that they appear above the surface, but on the 13th of this 
month (August) the ground was darkened by swarms of those insects, 
hastily carrying to their nests the dry leaves and stems of the plants* 
of which I send you by this post a specimen. On the 8th we had a 
fall of snow, and it kept extremely cold until the 13th, which was 
a warm day, whilst from the 14th the thermometer lowered again. 
There are houses in this neighbourhood which their owners have been 
compelled to abandon altogether, the ants having taken possession of 
them, from the floor to the ceiling. I have tried lime and various 
other means to expel them, but have so far succeeded only partly to 
keep them aloof from places imbibed with Calvert's disinfectant. Teak 
wood is said to be the only kind which they do not pierce. Informa- 
tion on the subject would prove very beneficial to the farmers of 
South Africa." 

Respecting Vertebrata my first impressions are scarcely worth 
recording. Mammals (Rodents or a few small and common^Carnivora 
excepted), kept without my reach, and the reptiles I avoided until I 
learnt a little more about the pisenous " species. I don't mean to say 
that I have not seen a jackal monkey, baboon, porcupine, or any ordi- 
nary brute. I desire their skins better than their friendship j but I 
certainly was pleased in spotting a fine Monitor Lizard, common in our 
valley stream. I was glad to secure a handsome hawksbill turtle, cast 
up by the sea waves. "j* Its interior was a perfect mess of shell pottage. 
Our common tortoise is, I believe, Testiido Grmca^ but the great berg 
tortoise, the starry, and the trap tortoise, occur also in some districts. 
We have a great variety of non-poisonous snakes, and some realiy 
lovely species. I have met and run away from a puff-adder — a most 
deadly reptile. I have been called in by my next door neighbour to 
m:easure the proportions of a sweet little night-adder. When first seen, 
it w^as passing over a lady's naked foot. That, lady remarked to her 
good man — " My love ! (I think that was the expression, perhaps it was 
dear ! I really don't recollect), there is a snake on my foot ! " That 
lady was a Joan d' Arc. The good man grasped a lead weight and 
smashed that night-adder's laterals just as they were disappearing 

* One of the Chenojpodece, a true Salicornia. — E. Hallack. 

t Probably gone astray. A visitor from eastern seas. We have also a green 
turtle. Some of these in the up-country districts are taken of tremendous size, 
over six feet long. 



146 



The Naturalist. 



througli a hole in the wall. Mind ! this is a rank exception to the rule 
of safety. I repeat — reptiles will " git," as the Yankees say, if they 
only git half a chance. 

When I first dipped my pen into the ink, I had intended to 
demolish a thousand details in few words, but, proceeding, letter 
has succeeded letter, and I am writing still. The order of things is 
reversed, and it may be that my first impressions, when totted down, 
bear the epitaph 

Here lies little matter in much room." 

So be it ! If you think I am going to sit down to a quiet dish of hash 
without gravy, or task without pleasure, it is an egregious error. But 
no ! you have conceded me space for intervening moral and philo- 
sophical discursions, and I am happy. There is one sentimental sigh 
yet to eject, or rather a diversion to entertain. How gladly your 
Yorkshire weavers rise with the lark, bolt a scanty breakfast, rush 
breathlessly to catch a lazy excursion train, suffer the stuffy atmosphere 
of a third-class smoking compartment, risk the penalties of railway 
accidents, impatiently submit to never-ending stoppages, delays, and 
ticket inspections, waste eight hours travelling for a two hours' revel 
in the delights of one snatching peep at the rolling sea, or a ramble on 
the orange peel bespattered beach. And here I may view the lordly 
ocean any moment. Such an ocean too ! Gaze across from the N.W. 
angle of Algoa Bay to the opposite shore. Trace the hazy line of 
pearly white sand which separates true land from true water. Kaise 
your eyes and define the junction of mountain and sky. Leslie, paint 
nature truly, and your effort is adjudged a fraud. Turner, turn'er 
attention to that threatening sky, those angry breakers, and imitate 
action on canvas. Museful poet, does your poetic license avail 
sufficiently Eansack the mine of thought and imagine when you 
cannot find. No appropriation, however sublime, will serve you here. 
Nature's beauty has oft been studied, but never spoken. Grand old 
ocean, you lack an impossible champion. I love you when your bosom 
heaves in mighty anger, or gently sways in smooth complacence. I 
love you in a thundering roaring temper, and I love you when the rage 
subsides. Nay, if beneath your glassy surface is concealed a treacherous 
heart, I love you still. Dash your sprayful arms against the whitened 
strand, or ripple softly on the shore, I care not. I love you in any 
mood and upon all occasions. They call you vile and fickle. I think 
you are genuine and constant, and most assuredly aristocratic if length 
of lineage is veritable proof. I too would cast away the shuttle and 



Clarke and Roebuck : Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire. 147 



suffer much to gaze at your lofty presence for one moment's pleasure. 
And as I love my liege, so do I revere his subjects, and of these I 
shall now speak. 

(To he continued,) 



NOTES ON THE VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE, 
1881-1883. 



By Wm. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., and Wm. Denison Roebuck. 



It is our intention to prepare from time to time — annually if possible 
— a report upon the vertebrate fauna of Yorkshire, in which we 
propose to embody not only notices of the rarer and more interesting 
occurrences in the county during the period covered by the scope of 
the report, but also such records of older date as may have escaped 
our attention during the compilation of our Handbook of the 
Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire," together with such emendations and 
corrections of the statements contained therein as may seem to be 
called for. 

The scope of the present report includes the period of time which 
has elapsed since the publication of our Handbook in the autumn 
of 1881 down to the end of 1883. The records in our hands for the 
present year are reserved for a future paper. This report includes 
notices of the kind above indicated concerning 87 species, of which 
the following ten appear to be additions to the Yorkshire list : — 
Rhinolophus Jdpposideros^ Emberiza rustica, Torpedo hebetans^ Raja 
maculata^ Auxis rocliei^ Trachypterus arcticus^ Regalecus grillii^ Engraulis 
encradcholus, and OrtJiagoriscus iruncatus. But in addition to these 
there are various occurrences we have to record which are of special 
interest, such as those of Vespertilio Natter eri^ V. mydacinus^ and 
JDelpJiinus tursio among the Mammalia, of Turdus varius, Cyanecula sj* ? 
Cypselus melba^ Botaurm lentiginosus^ Ardea garzetta, and the breeding 
in the county of Querquedida circia and Spatula clypeata among the 
Birds, and the occurrence of Brama Baii^ Mugil septe^itrionalis, 
Regalecus Banksii, Ctenolabrus rupestris, Nerophis aquoreus^ and Athe- 
rina presbyter among the Fishes. 

The Numerical Summary of species now stands as in the following 
table, the British forms being also given for comparison : — 



148 



The Naturalist. 





YORKSHIRE. 


BRITAIN. 


Mammalia : 






Terrestrial 


32 


45 


Marine 


13 


26 


JLJ ill IJbo •»• ••• 


307 


380 


Eeptiles : 






Terrestrial 


4 


7 


Marine ... 


2 


2 


A Mphioia ... ... 


a 
u 




Fishes • 






Freshwater 


32 


53 


Marine 


123 


196 




519 


716 



A few preliminary remarks on the chief features of the following 
report will not be without interest. 

The Mammalia of Yorkshire were for the most part so well known 
at the time of publication of the Handbook, that but little is required 
by way of addition or correction, except so far as regards the two 
groups— the Bats and the Cetaceans — which appear to be always the 
most imperfectly studied mammals in any district. 

With regard to the Bats, the result of Roebuck's investigations has 
been that, with the assistance of correspondents, the geographical 
range of some of the forms in Yorkshire has been studied to some 
purpose. One species is added to the list, and two others — hitherto 
only recorded for the county on the strength of isolated occurrences — 
have been fully confirmed as inhabiting the county, one of the latter 
indeed proving to be a common and widely distributed form. There 
is yet good work to be done in this group, for Daubenton's Bat — 
which is sure to be found sooner, or later — has not yet been detected. 
Yorkshire appears still to remain the northern limit of the range of 
the Noctule, as Mr. R. Morton Middleton informs us that its reported 
occurrence in South Durham was not confirmed. 

The study of the Cetaceans is much more difficult from their habitat 
and large size, and our only hope is that a competent naturalist may 
be at hand in the event of the capture of animals of this order. 



Clarke and Koebuck : Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire. 149 

Birds. — Numerically the Yorkshire avifauna remains at 307, the 
addition of the Rustic Bunting being counterbalanced by the subtrac- 
tion of the Barbary Partridge. Should, however, specific rank be 
accorded to Pallas's Great Grey Shrike, as is done by Mr. Seebohm, 
this form would also rank as an addition. 

Here it will be advisable to call the pointed attention of onr readers 
to the two paragraphs at the head of p. xxxvii. of the Introduction to 
our Handbook, ^vhich appear to have been overlooked by some of our 
critics, w^ho might there have learned that we never allowed or 
recognized the claims of such dubious records as those of Richard's 
Pipit, the Purple Martin, the Great Black Woodpecker, the Hairy 
Woodpecker, the Little Owl, the Acadian Owl, the Harlequin Duck, 
the Passenger Pigeon, the Virginian Colin, the Sooty Tern, and the 
Laughing Gull. None of these are included in our numerical 
summaries, although in the body of our work we felt it quite within 
our duty to give the evidence of their occurrence for what our readers 
might consider it worth. 

Reptiles a.vd Amphtbiavs. — As to these groups there is nothing 
to remark except that it is very desirable that naturalists should keep 
a look-out for further occurrences of the Natterjack Toad iu the 
county. As to the so-called Sand Lizard, we have not yet been 
satisfied that the animal occurs so far north, the Northumbrian 
occurrence hinted at on p. xli. being a myth. 

As to the Fishes — the least-investigated class in our fauna — we 
are pleased to be able not only to add seven species to the list, but to 
give a variety of further particulars and additional occuiTences of 
interesting forms ; and it may be as well to remark that to the severe 
storms which prevailed in early April, 1882, we owe several records of 
pelagic and abyssal forms, such as the Torpedo and the Deal-fish, and 
other rare species. No doubt had naturalists been more numerous in 
our sea-board towns and villages, others would have been detected. 

The numbers which are prefixed to the names are intended to 
correspond to those used in the Handbook. 

MAMMALIA. 

1. RJiinolophm Jiipposideros (Bechst.). Lesser Horse-slioe Bat, 

This species — an important addition to the Yorkshire fauna — is not 
uncommon at Eavestone, near Ripon, where it is taken by Messrs. 
James Ingleby and William Storey, from both of whom Roebuck 
has received specimens in the flesh, and one or two alive (Zool 
1882, p. 186 ; Nat. 1882, p. 166). 



150 



The Naturalist, 



12. Vespertilio Natiereri Kuhl.. Reddish-gray Bat. 

Two specimens were sent in the flesh to Roebuck by Mr. W. Storey 
of Pateley Bridge, who captured one of them on the 24th of May, 
1883, in Harefield Wood, near that place, and the other in the same 
habitat a few days later. 

15. Vespertilio mystacinus Leisl.. Whiskered Bat, 

This species, which our work was the means of introducing to the 
Yorkshire fauna, may now be considered as a widely distributed and 
fairly numerous form in the county. Roebuck has had specimens 
from Harrogate (Grange), Eavestone (Ingleby), Pateley Bridge 
(Storey), Ben Rhydding (Smethurst), &c. 

23. Maries sylvestris Nils. Marten. 

Specimens are recorded as having been killed in Raydale and in 
Kexby Woods, near York (Field, Oct. 1, 1881, p. 504). 

28. Meles taxiis (Schreb). Badger. 

Stragglers continue to be reported from time to time, as at Yarm, 
Sleningford, &c. 

{42. Hyperobdon rostratum (Chem.) Common Beaked-whale. 
43. H. latifrons Gray. Broad-fronted Beaked-whale. 
Mr. Southwell informs us that H. latifrons has been proved to be 
the male of H. rostratum., thus diminishing the Yorkshire list by one 
species. 

50. — Glohicephalus melas (Trail). Pilot Whale. 

One was captured off Flamborough, in February, 1865, and recorded 
as the " Ca'ing Whale, Glohicephalus dedactor " (J . Freeland Young, 
Field, Feb. 25th, 1865.) 

53. Delphinustursio ¥dbh. Bottle-nosed Dolphin. 

One stranded near Goole, Oct. 4th, 1881, the identification of which 
was confirmed by Mr. Thomas Southwell (Bunker, Naturalist, 1881, 
p. 66). 

BIRDS. 

5. Turdus varius Pall. White's Thrush : 

Additional occurrences : Rimswell, near Withernsea, one shot 
during the first week in November, 1881, and now in the collection 
of Mr. R. T. Burnham, of Rimswell, where Clarke has seen it. 
Waplington Manor, near Pocklington, one shot in early January, 
1882, (Backhouse, Zool , 1882, p. 74; Inchbald, Field, 1882, 
p. 201). 



Notes and Queries, 



151 



8. Turdus torquatus L.. Ring Ouzel. 

The solitary instance of this species nesting near Beverley must 
now be considered doubtful. 

11. C incl us melanog aster Brehm. Black-hrcoMed Dipper. 

Seebohm having expressed a doubt as to the occurrence of this 
species or race in Britain, Clarke forwarded him the Welwick 
specimen for examination, with the result that it was considered 
an undoubte 1 example of this form. 

(To he continued.) 



Goosanders at Newton Kyme. — I saw nine behind my house on the 
River Wharfe. I never saw birds in such magnificent plumage, but I 
could not get a shot at them. It is very unusual to see so many together. 
J. Chaloner, Newton Kyme, March 6th, 1884. 

Banks' Garfish — Reqalecus Baiiksii. — In April, 1882, I recorded the 
capture of this fish on the Yorkshire coast, and as the local newspapers 
may not fall into the hands of all your readers, I extract the following 
from the Bridlington Gazette of last week : — On Tuesday, a tine speci- 
men of the ribbon fish was driven ashore on Flambro' rocks, during the 
late heavy gale ; the length of the specimen is 15 feet 3 inches, 18 inches 
wide, and about 4 inches thick. On the fisherman approaching, it rose 
up in the air, moved in a serpentine fashion, but was stunned by a stone 
and easily captured. It was eventually sold to Dr. W. Whittaker, of 
Scarbro', and is now in the hands of Mr. Thompson, taxidermist of that 
place, for preservation, and with the intention of exhibiting it in London 
and the provinces. A bid of £25 was made on behalf of the British 
Museum authorities." The specimen I recorded in 1882 was 19 feet long, 
but as Couch's largest was 15 feet 8 inches, the present is a noteable 
capture. The style of motion mentioned above, conforms pretty well to 
that given to Couch, by fishermen, on a similar occasion. ''It came on 
with a gentle lateral undulating motion, shewing its crest and a small 
portion of the head above the water." — N. F. Dobree, Beverley, 1st 
March, 1884. 

Tectura testudinalis, Muller, in Yorkshire. — In the Naturalist for 
October, 1883, page 53, I have read Mr. Crowther's remarks respecting 
the occurrence of this species at Whitby. On referring to my note book, 
I find I collected living specimens ten years ago, at Flamboro', on the 
rocks, at extreme low water ; and my friend Mr. Cash, of Halifax, 
informs me that he met with it in the same place last summer. I may 
also state that in August last I dredged it in 20 fathoms water, off Port 



152 



The Naturalist. 



Soderic, Isle of Man, but chiefly dead shells. This however, is not a 
new locality, as the late Prof. Edward Forbes, in his ^' Malacologia 
Monensis," page 34, mentions T. testudinalis as occurring on the under 
surface of stones at very low water, Ballaugh." The Manx shells I 
obtained are smaller, and not so prettily marked as the Yorkshire speci- 
mens. Much has been written about the migratory habits of this species, 
and it would be interesting to learn whether it may not be found much 
further south than the localities hitherto recorded. — Geo. H. Parke, 
Furness Abbey, February 1st, 1884. 



ilainfall fox ^thxmx^. 





of 
gauge 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall. 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

neaviest 
Fall. 




Days 


1884. 


1883. 


Fall. 


HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Robson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
1-57 


16 


7-32 


*5-51 


23 


0-60 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


1-94 


14 


5-97 


3-27 t 


1 


116 


HORSFORTH . . . (James Fox) 


350 


2-30 


18 


6-07 


4-76 t 


1 


1-19 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


4-12 


22 




11-78 


2 


1-21 


Barnsley ... (Dr Sadler)... 


350 


1-78 


16 


5-46 


5-70 


1 


0-72 


INGBIRCHWORTH (Mr. Taylor) 


853 


2-92 


20 


10-24 


10-50 


1 


0-91 


Wentworth Castle (Mr. 

Fisher) 


520 


1-87 


17 


6 16 


7-33 


1 


0-70 


GOOLE (J. Harrison)... 


25 


1-22 


11 


4-82 


4-36 


1 


•50 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


1.44 


16 


4-26 


2-92 § 


1 


•72 


ScARBORO' (A. Rowntree)... 


130 


1-75 


17 


4-74 


1-76 II 


1 


•85 


Thirsk...(W. Gregson) 


100 


1-52 


15 


5-94 




1 


0-57 


Masham (Thos. Carter^) ... 


269 


2-31 


19 


7-66 




1 


0.46 


Shadwell (Geo. Paul) 




2-19 


14 


5-94 




1 





* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-83. 
t Average of 30 years, 1853-62, & 1865-84. t Average of 15 years, 1870-84. 
§ Average of 34 years, 1850-83. || Average fall for Feb. (18 years). 



ll^porlB of ^nnetus. 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting March 18th, Mr. T. 
Lister in the chair. — The chief business was in connection with the results 
of the exhibition got up for the visit of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. 
Letters were received, and personal communications given, expressing 
favourable opinions of the exhibition, the annual meeting, and the 
lectures of Mr. J. G. Baker, president of the Union, Mr. W. F. de V. Kane, 



Reports of Societies. 



153 



of Dublin, and Dr. Brady of Sunderland. Local excursions were proposed 
for the season, the first of which is to be Edlington and Conisborough. 
Little to remark as to birds : a flight of long-tailed tits seen about the 
gardens, Silkstone, Feb. 22 ; chaffinch, song first noted Feb. 15 ; the yellow- 
hammer sang on the 16th ; pied- wagtails again noted Feb. 19th, and now 
becoming frequent ; they partially migrate to warm parts of England in 
winter, grey wagtails coming in late autumn and leaving in spring ; king- 
fishers frequently noted every winter. The most unusual occurrence has 
been a pair of wheatears, Jan. 17th, on Staincross common ; they are 
usually summer visitors, leaving for warmer southern counties in late 
autumn. I saw a kestrel, Jan. 7th, hovering low and darting to a hedge 
bank, near Sandal ; saw siskins again in railway cutting below my house 
at Victoria Crescent, but not in such great numbers as were reported about 
Christmas. A heron was brought for my examination, Jan. 12th, shot 
at Brough : several were seen up to the close of the month Mr. Bond, 
of Wombwell, reports many sparrow-hawks, kestrels, and gulls ; and 
two more otters making about seven in the Dearne valley in two years : 
these are desired by the land proprietors to be protected. From Hems- 
worth woods and reservoir, which are under wise protection, little grebes, 
goosanders, herons, sparrow-hawks, kestrels, gold-finches, and gold- 
crested wrens are reported by Mr. Creighton, who thinks that the bird 
and gun acts, and trespass laws, are causing some scarce birds to increase 
in numbers. — T. Lister. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting held Jan. 29th, 1884. 
Mr. Carter presided. Mr. Firth described a ramble to Shipley Glen, and 
reported having seen the dipper, creeper, blue titmouse, cole titmouse, 
magpie, thrush, missel thrush, wren and robin. Mr. Soppitt gave an 
account of a ramble about Saltaire, and reported having found a fungus 
{Myce^ia hyemalis) which he considered very early. Mr. Carter exhibited 
a box containing the whole of the British representatives of the genus 
Zygcena (burnet moths), and pointed out their specific characteristics. 
Mr. Firth exhibited a number of moths which pass the winter in the 
perfect state, including D. templi, C, vaccmii^ C, miata, S. d^ibitata, &c. 
Mr. Shackleton, of Keighley, showed a number of mosses collected in 
various localities. Mr. Soppitt then gave his lecture on Heteroecism of 
certain Fungi," which he said signifies a species which commences life 
on one plant and completes it on another. He gave as an illustration 
the corn-mildew, which is so destructive in the corn-growing districts, 
but has not been found here. It commences its growth on the barberry 
(Berheris vulgaris), and completes it on the corn. The lecture was illus- 
trated by a number of specimens of fungi in different stages of their 
growth. 

Meeting held Feb. 12th, 1884, Mr. Soppitt in the chair.— Mr. Soppitt 
reported a ramble about Seven Arches, near Bingley, and in Shipley 
Glen, and named a number of flowers he had seen ; he also found 



154 



The Naturalist. 



the following shells : Zonites aliariiis Z. crystallinus, and the fresh- water 
mussel. He also reported having seen the grey wagtail. Mr. Carter 
exhibited a box of beetles from Reading, but as he had only just 
received them, they had not been named. Mr. Bennett exhibited 
with the oxy-hydrogen light a series of photographic views of Irish 
scenery, and views taken in the vicinity of the Falls of Niagara, accom- 
panied by explanatory readings by Mr. H. S. Ward. Mr. West exhibited 
a number of specimens of plants found in different parts of Ireland, some 
of which had not been found elsewhere. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting 
Feb. 25th, in the Free Library ; the president (Mr. S. J. Capper,) in 
the chair. A paper entitled Heminiscences of Burnt Wood, Stafford- 
shire " — communicated by Mr. Joseph Chappell (Manchester) — was read, 
in which the author (who was present) detailed his experiences of several 
excursions into that district, special allusion being made to the captures 
of the exceedingly rare Notodonta hicolora by himself and a friend, 
specimens of this insect in various stages being exhibited by him. The 
Kev. S. Fletcher Williams followed with a paper on Henry Thoreau, 
the American Poet-Naturalist," in which were vividly portrayed the life 
and character of this extraordinary student of nature and persevering 
observer of the habits of the animals of his native woods. During the 
conversazione, the Rev. H. H. Higgins exhibited the collection of insects 
intended for the circulating museum for educational purposes. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — Dr. B. Carrington, F.R.S.E., 
in the chair, — The honorary secretary exhibited and presented to the 
society specimens of Amblystegium porphyrrhizum which had been 
gathered at Southport, 1875. He subsequently made some remarks on 
its discovery, detection, and its position as a British moss. Mr. W. H. 
Pearson exhibited some specimens of hepatics which he had received for 
determination from Prof. N. E. Kindberg, of Sweden, which had been 
collected in Spitzbergen by R. Gyllencreutz. They were Marchaniia 
polymorpha, Sauteria alpina, and Blepharozea ciliaris, Mr. Pearson also 
exhibited Plagiochila tridentata from Llanberis., collected in May, 1883, 
this being a new locality for this rare hepatic. Mr. George Burgess 
exhibited a number of freshly-gathered mosses from the neighbourhood 
of Delamere ; amongst them was the interesting Tetraphis pellucida in 
abundant fruit. Two pamphlets in French were placed upon the table, 
presented by R. du Buysson, a corresponding member of the society — 
the one being an analytical key to the mosses belonging to the family 
Grimmacece, and the other was entitled Mouses et Hepatiques de 
L'Allier," par I'Abbe Y. Berthoumien et R. du Buysson, 1883. Mr. J. 
Cash read a first portion of the letters and correspondence of Edward 
Hobson, which he had kindly arranged at the wish of the society. The 
portion read proved extremely interesting to the members. — Thos. 
Rogers, Hon. Sec, 27, Oldham-road, Manchester*. 



Reports of Societies. 



155 



York Field Naturalists' and Scientific Society. — The first meeting 
of this newly organized society was held in the Albert E/Ooms, Stonegate. 
The following specimens were brought by members for exhibition : — Mr. 
Alfred Waller, four new British plants, Naias alaganensis, Ononis horrida, 
Agrostis nigra, and Chara hraunii ; Mr. Robert B. Cooke, a group of 
British marine shells — Pinna pectinata, Anomia ephippium, and Pecten 
maxirmis from Brixham, Pecten varius and JSIassa reticulata from Torbay, 
Fusns antiqiius and P. gracilis from Lynn, and Cyproea Puropcea from 
Sheldon, South Devon. The hon. sec. (Mr. S. Walker) exhibited a series 
of the local Erehia epipJiron and Dicranura furcula, Mr. Bailey's 
box contained eggs of the following birds : — Capercaille {Tetrao nro- 
gallns), grey plover (Squatarola helvetica), heron {Ardea cinerea), spoon- 
bill (Platalea leucorcdia), black stork (Ciconia nigra), also a large species 
of sea star {Asterias) from Brisbane. Mr. Robert Button showed a 
cabinet drawer of lepidoptera, containing Chelonia plantaginis C. villica, 
Arctia fuliginosa, A. urticce, &c. The president read a paper on Bacillus 
tuber culosus,^^Sbnd showed a specimen under the microscope. Having 
explained the method of preparing the specimen, he said that Koch had 
first described these baccilli, which were delicate thread-like bodies from 
one-quarter to one-half as long as the diameter of the blood corpuscule. 
They behaved in a characteristic manner with certain of the aniline dyes. 
Koch had cultivated them for weeks and months apart from the body, 
and then inoculated animals with them, producing the characteristic 
disease by this means. Without entering before that non-medical 
audience upon the great question of the pathology of tuberculi, and its 
relation to consumption, the lecturer said he might at any rate point out 
that here was a definite botanical organism, found under very peculiar 
conditions, and therefore interesting to all naturalists. Certain people 
were prone to tubercular diseases. It was markedly hereditary. It 
prevailed especially under special hygienic and geographical circumstances. 
This and many other facts seemed to show that whether or not the bacillus 
was the cause of the disease, at any rate it required a specially disposed 
animal-tissue for its soil. Of course, so far, the case was on all fours with 
that of the yeast-plant, which also required a special soil, viz., one 
containing sugar, to produce alcoholic fermentation. A vote of thanks 
was accorded the lecturer at the close of his able and interesting address. 
— Saml. Walker, Hon. Sec. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — 22nd Annual Meeting, Barnsley, 
Tuesday, March 4th, 1884. — This was a very successful meeting, and in 
honour of it the Barnsley Naturalists' Society had organized an extensive 
and admirably arranged Exhibition of Natural History objects. This was 
opened at about half-past two by Mrs. T. E. Taylor, of Dodworth Hall, 
after which the visitors proceeded to inspect the various objects shown. 
The business meetings commenced at 4 p.m., when the General Committee 
met to receive the report of the Executive . There were present several 



156 



The Naturalist. 



of the permanent members of that Committee, besides delegates repre- 
senting the Societies at Huddersfield, Barnsley, Heckmondwike, Wake- 
field, Holmfirth, Liversedge, Ovenden, Rastrick-cum-Brighouse, Honley, 
Leeds (3), Bradford (3), Goole, Selby, Sheffield, Dewsbury, Malton, 
Halifax, Doncaster, Beverley, York, Ilkley, and Shipley. The chair was 
occupied by the President, Mr. J. G. Baker, F.R.S. The minutes of 
the previous annual meeting having been taken as read, the following 
new members of the Union were elected : — Rev. H. E. Fox, M.A,, of 
Durham, Messrs. F. Priestman, ex-mayor of Bradford, Thos. Pratt of 
Ripon, J. Rawlinson Ford of Leeds, A. Paterson of Doncaster, Arthur 
Roberts of Keighley, Henry Marsh of Leeds, W. E. Brady and George 
Rose of Barnsley, and J. A. Erskine Stuart, of Stain cliffe, near Dews- 
bury. The ten following members were then chosen as additional perman- 
ent members of the General Committee : — Messrs. J. C. Burrell of Shef- 
field, W. N. Cheesman of Selby, J. E. Clark, B.A., B.Sc, &c., and Geo. 
C. Dennis of York, N. F. Dobree and J. Ambrose Ridgway, F.R.A.S., of 
Beverley, W. Gregson of Baldersby, J. H. Rowntree of Scarborough, 
M. B. Slater of Malton, and J. J. Stead of Heckmondwike. The Annual 
Report and Balance Sheet were then read by Mr. W. Eagle Clarke, 
F.L.S., of Leeds, one of the Secretaries, as follows : — 

22nd ANNUAL REPORT. 

The progress of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union during this the 22nd year 
of its existence has been steady and well-sustained, and the Executive Council 
have to congratulate the members on the fact that the new constitution which 
was adopted at the last annual meeting has worked iu an extremely satisfactory 
manner. The modifications which it introduced were mainly in the direction 
of the further development of the British Association principle of government, 
and it is to one of these modifications that the Executive Council, which now 
addresses the members for the first time, owes its existence. Ihey have to 
report that one of the Union's objects has been promoted during the year 
by means of the pablication of the two instalments of the Transactions, and 
the other by a successful series of field-meetings, at which (as will appear by 
the reports of the Sections) sound and useful observational work has been done. 

THE FIELD MEETINGS 

held during the year — for each of which was prepared the customary circular 
descriptive of the natural history and physical features of the neighbourhood 
visited — were five in number, one for each of the districts into which Yorkshire 
is now divided for this purpose. The places visited were as follows : — 

Doncaster, Whit Monday, May 14th. 
Filey, Monday, June 11th. 
Strensall C'ommon, Saturday, July 14th. 
Washburn Valley, Monday, August 6th. 
Malham, Saturday, September 1st. 



Reports of Societies. 



157 



The interest taken in the meetings was well sustained, the attendance averaging 
about 60 at each. At some of them the Union was indebted to local gentlemen 
for permission to visit their estates, and to Mr. Winter Cockill and the High 
Sheriff of Yorkshire for their generous hospitality to the members who visited 
Doncaster and Malham respectively. The Strensall meeting in July was disap- 
pointing so far as regards the attendance, but on the other hand the largeness of 
the attendance when the Union visits places which are but little known or more 
than usually difficult of access is a source of encouragement, evidencing that 
members are fully alive to the cardinal importance of the exploration of little- 
known districts. 

THE SOCIETIES 

which constitute the Union are now 39 in number, an increase of four during 
the year, the newly-added Societies being the following : — 

NO OF. 
MEMBEES. 

Shipley Field Naturalists' Club 28 

Bradford Microscopical Society 61 

Rotherham Naturalists' Society 63 

Doncaster Juvenile Naturalists' and Scientific Society ... 24 

176 

The statistics which are furnished by the secretaries of the different Societies 
show that the Union now includes 2408 Associates and 326 Members, or 2734 
altogether, an increase of 361 Members and Associates during the year. 

THE MEMBERSHIP 

of the Union itself — as distinguished from that of the various individual Societies 
— has now to be considered in a new aspect. The Annual Subscribers of former 
years are now designated Members, and have increased in number during the 
year, the figure now standing at 326. 

The Executive Council would now again urge upon the attention of the 
Associates the desirability of their supporting the Union in its work by becoming 
Members. There is much valuable matter awaiting publication in the Transac- 
tions, for which additional funds are needed ; and it may be pointed out moreover 
that the penny per head which is contributed by the associated Societies for their 
members can only be looked upon as a nominal retaining-fee, much more money 
being spent upon the Associates than the Union receives from them. It can 
therefore be fairly expected that Associates and others who take an interest in 
the investigation of Yorkshire Natural History and are able to contribute 
towards its financial encouragement, should assist by enrolling themselves as 
Members. 

PUBLICATIONS. 

Parts 5 and 6 of the Transactions have been issued to the Members during the 
year, while Part 7 is printed and will be circulated immediately, and Part 8 is in 
preparation. Special attention has been given to this most important branch of 
the Union's work, and your Executive venture to think that their report upon 
this head is a satisfactory one. 

It is also a matter for satisfaction that the year has witnessed the completion of 
the printing of Mr. Porritt's long-expected " List of Yorkshire Lepidoptera," the 



4 



158 



The Naturalist. 



first completed memoir which the Union has issued, and also the first completed 
attempt to catalogue the indigenous Yorkshire forms of that important group of 
insects. 

THE NATURALIST,'* 

which has since its foundation nine years ago been the recognized organ of the 
Union, having been conducted under its auspices by Messrs.. Hobkirk and Porritt 
at their own risk, will, on the completion of the current or ninth volume, become 
the property of the Union, the present Editors having decided to relinquish the 
oJfice which they have held so long and so worthily, and which they originally 
undertook at the Union's request. In their stead Messrs. Roebuck and Clarke 
have been appointed the Editors of a new series, which is to be commenced in 
August next. 

THE PRESIDENCY. 

Your Executive have now to announce that the important office of President 
has been ofi'ered to and accepted by the Right Hon. Lord Walsingham, M.A., 
F.L.S., F.Z.S.. a naturalist whose tenure of it will add yet further distinction to 
that which it derives from former occupants of the chair ; and they will conclude 
their report by the expression of their sense of the obligation under which the 
Union and all its Members have been laid to the distinguished author of" North 
Yorkshire," who this day ceases to be our President, by his acceptance of the 
highest mark of respect and appreciation which it is in our power to bestow. 

After some discussion, the report and balance sheet ( as appended) were 
unanimously adopted on the motion of Mr. J. W. Davis, seconded by 
Mr. A. Clarke, president of the Huddersfield Naturalists' Society. The 
excursion-programme was then considered, and the recommendations of 
the Executive (with the alteration of one of the dates from Saturday to 
Thursday) were accepted as follows : — 

Maltby Common and Roche Abbey, Thursday, May 8th ; 
Sherburn, for Bishop's Wood, Whit Monday, June 2nd ; 
Hawes, Saturday, July 5th ; 

Spurn Point, Bank Holiday Monday, August 4th ; 
Helmsley, Wednesday, Sept. 3rd. 

For the next Annual Meeting there were two invitations presented — one 
from Beverley, and one from Doncaster. The delegates from those towns 
having spoken in support of the invitations, motions were duly made and 
seconded in favour of each. On being put to the vote, the majority was 
found to be in favour of Doncaster. Various dates were proposed, but 
eventually Tuesday, the 3rd of March, was decided upon. Proceeding to 
the election of officers, the President stated that his successor had already 
been chosen, the office having been accepted by Lord Walsingham, M. A., 
F.L.S., F.Z.S. The two retiring Secretaries — Messrs. Wm. Denison 
Roebuck and Wm. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., both of Leeds — and the ten 
retiring members of the Executive Council — the Revs. W. Fowler, M.A., 
Liversedge, and W. C. Hey, M.A., York, Messrs. J. W. Davis, F.L.S., 
Halifax, Thos. Birks, jun., Goole, C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., Dewsbury, 



Reports of Societies. 



159 



G. T. Porritt, F.L.S., Huddersfield, E. B. Wrigglesworth, Wakefield, 
J. J. Stead, Heckmondwike, B. Holgate, F.G.S., Leeds, and H. T. 
Soppitt, Bradford — were all re-elected, and Messrs. B. Holgate and 
W. B. Russell, LL.B., of Leeds, were again chosen as auditors. This 
concluded the business of the General Committee. Tea was then served, 
after which the various sections met and elected their officers as follows : 

VERTEBRATE ZOOLOGY I 

Mr. John Cordeaux, M.B.O.U., Great Cotes, president (re-elected) ; 
Mr. James Backhouse, jun., York, secretary. 

CONCHOLOGY. 

Rev. W. C. Hey, M.A., York, president ; 

Mr. J. D. Butterell, Beverley, secretary ; both re-elected. 

ENTOMOLOGY : 

Mr. G. T. Porritt, F.L.S., Huddersfield, president ; 
Mr. E. B. Wrigglesworth, Wakefield, secretary ; 
Mr. S. L. Mosley, Huddersfield, recorder in Economic Entomology : 
all re-elected. 

BOTANY : 

Mr. Thos. Hick, B.A., B.Sc, Harrogate, president ; 
Mr. P. F. Lee, Dewsbury, secretary for phanerogamic botany ; 
Mr. Geo. Massee, Scarborough, secretary for cryptogamic botany : 
all re-elected. 

GEOLOGY : 

Mr. J. W. Davis, F.L.S., F.G.S., Halifax, president : 
Mr. J. E. Wilson, Bradford, and Rev. E. Maule Cole, M.A., Wet- 
wang, secretaries : all re-elected. 

The Annual Public Meeting was held in the evening in the large room 
of the Public Hall, when there was an attendance of about 300, and the 
chair was taken by Mr. J. G. Baker, F.R.S., F.L.S., president of the 
Union, who was accompanied on the platform by the Mayor of Barnsley 
and other gentlemen. The Annual Report having been read and the 
Excursion programme announced for the information of the members 
generally, the Presidential Address was delivered, Mr. Baker taking for 
his subject The Fathers of Yorkshire Botany." Dr. Lancaster, the 
president of the Barnsley Naturalists' Society, presided during the 
delivery of the address, and at its close a vote of thanks was enthusiastic- 
ally accorded to Mr Baker, on the motion of Mr. Chas. Wemyss, of 
Cannon Hall, seconded by Mr. W. F. de V. Kane, M.A., of Dublin. 
Mr. Baker having replied to the vote, resumed the chair, and a vote 
of thanks to the Barnsley Naturalists' Society for their cordial reception 
of the Union, was moved by Mr. A. H. Allen, F.I.C., &c., of Sheffield, 
seconded by Mr. E. B. Wrigglesworth, of Wakefield, and cordially voted. 
Mr. Thos. Lister replied, after which the meeting closed. 



160 The Naturalist. 

Y.N.U.— BALANCE SHEET, March 4th, 1884. 



Receipts. £ s. d. 

Balance from last year 13 5 9 

Levies paid by Associated 
Societies : — 

,. „ 1882 0 9 0 

„ „ 1883 11 7 4 

„ „ 1884 1 2 6 
Members' Subscriptions : — 

1878 0 5 0 

„ „ 1879 2 11 6 

„ „ 1880 7 1 0 

„ „ 1881 20 13 6 

„ „ 1882 33 2 1 

„ „ 1883 55 18 0 

„ „ 1884 1 5 6 

. 3 10 1 



Sales of Publications., 



Payments. £ s. d. 
For Members' Card and 
General Expenses, Prin- 
ting, Postages, Minute 

Books, &c 10 17 5 

Guarantee in respect of the 
Meeting at Wakefield in 

1882 1 3 7 

Expenses of Doncaster 

Meeting , 5 14 2 

Expenses of Filey „ 5 7 7 
„ Strensall „ 5 6 0 
„ Washburn,, 4 19 4 
„ Malham „ 5 10 2 
„ Annual Meet- 
ings 3 10 0 

Expenses incurred by the 
Treasurer for Postage 
and Beceipt Stamps, Cir- 
culars, Receipt Books, 

&c 7 15 1 

Subscription refunded which 

was paid twice over 0 10 6 

Prospectus, Entry Forms, 
Envelopes, and Special 
Circulars to accompany 
same, and Postage of 

part of same 12 15 10 

Hektograph and Rubber 

Stamps 1 11 6 

Expenses of Library and 
Exchange of Transac- 
tions 2 1 0 

The Naturalist, Vol. IX.— 
Copies supplied to 69 

Members 12 1 6 

Reprints of President's Ad- 
dress 110 

Part Y. of Transactions 

Printing 15 7 6 

Binding, Postages, Author's 
Reprints and Corrections, 
and Printed Wrappers... 5 11 1 
Part VI. of Transactions 

Printing 19 15 0 

Binding, Postages, Author's 
Reprints and Corrections, 
Printed Wrappers, and 
Sundries 5 12 10 

Total Expenditure 126 11 1 

Balance in Treasurer's 

hand 24 0 2 



£150 11 3 



£150 11 3 



#iigmal Jlrticles. 



NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 

( Continued.) 

By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

The marine MoUusca, or rather sea-washed specimens of impres- 
sionable shells, for excepting Turho^ Patella, Bullia, Twaitella, 
Haliotis, Triton, Chiton, Pleurotoma, and a few others (univalves, 
bivalves excepted) occurring near or upon the shore or rocks, we have 
seldom an opportunity of taking living animals, and for many reasons 
dredging is expensive and dangerous. Probably if these diflficulties 
could be removed there would be a magnificent field for the collector 
around the east coast of Southern Africa. Scarcity of rain is our 
agricultural curse. Peculiarity of river courses is one of the banes of 
progression and enterprise, and around the Algoa coast stream or river 
in rapid succession cuts into the land, and renders locomotion difficult, 
and navigation dangerous. This impacability of African rivers has 
bothered the ;mental powers of all our famous travellers, and a big 
obstacle it is to remove. The physical features of our dark continent 
are truly perplexing. Drifting sands and sand barriers along the 
coast. Inland yawning chasms, and stubborn kloofs surprising us by 
the suddenness of their appearance. Scarcity of water where plenty 
is wanted ; abundance where useless or rejected. Mountain blocks 
and brackish karoos. These circumstances all combine and scorn 
human effort. Likewise the ocean jeers at expert navigators. Not 
satisfied with reefy custodians or personal surf muscles,* with jutting 
capes or Samsonian waves, not satisfied to link current to current in 
one tempestuous rushing torrent — a marine river — passing with fearful 
velocity round the southern point, we must needs have minor currents 
cropping up unawares, and deceitful shifting stream beds. Add to 
these submerged plateaux of connected rocks, and bristling semi-hidden 
reefs, add stiff south-easters, and you may form a mild conception of 

* As I write, news arrives of a tremendous tidal wave observed at East 
London, Port Alfred, and other coast ports. It was slightly felt here. Capt. 
"Webster, Com. Currie, S.S. " Hawarden Castle," reports great strain on his 
ship's cable, and violent plunging of the vessel. At East London the tide rose 
considerably. Tide gauges at various places indicated curious irregularities. 
Says the E.P. Telegraph — " The origin of this tidal wave may probably be as- 
cribed to remarkable volcanic action of unusual severity reported to have occurred 
in the Straits of Sun da, where the physical features of the place have undergone 
considerable changes." 

N.S., Vol. ix. May, 1884. 



TiTE Natitraltst. 



the reasons wliicli mitigate a shell-collector's dredging ardour. That 
good stuff lines the border bottom of our quaint old ocean I am sure. 
How to get at it is another question, and we are compelled to accept 
what his eccentric whim may cast ashore. Against such opposition 
Rous calculates as a good day's work the bagging of one fair shell, and 
so do I. More than once have I tramped my twenty miles o'er rocks 
and sand, on naked feet, to return with one decent Terehratitla,'^ or one 
Marginella, or one Cyprcea. Now and then a capital haul turns up : 
Kraimia rubra, or Terebratula radiata in quantities after a sea-breeze, 
and other shells in due order, but very seldom is this the case. 

The localisation of shells on this coast is noticeable. Walking on 
the sand towards Port Elizabeth, until the Zwartkops river is reached, 
vast quantities of bivalves, Donax, Venus, Mytilus, and sometimes 
Pinna, are found ; then past the town round by Cape Recife a break 
occurs, when they re-commence and continue to the next pile of rocks, 
and so on indefinitely. But it is impossible to connect a fixed law 
proving the habitats or peregrination antics of Algoa mollusca, although 
aching limbs through useless roving have relegated my hopes of new 
finds in distant solitary spots, and although I have proved most 
conclusively the value of a site selected. I know just where to go to risk 
the taking of a decent PupilUa (see PI. ix., Fig. 5). I know that from 
the Beacons to Recife is a good ground for Conus tinianus, C. rosaceus 
(Fig. 3), and our eagerly sought for Valuta Bullata. I know one 
sequestered sand nook anent a mighty cave, where a certain Spirula is 
a dead certainty. I would it were otherwise. Of V, Bullata, from 
fifty-four collected specimens I have managed to secure one really 
handsome (Fig. 1, nat. size). Our representative collections show a 
deficiency in marine fauna, but I do not believe the one figured can 
be beaten in any African museum. Next to HuUata I have prized 
Marginella Mosaica (Fig. 2) seldom obtained in good condition. I 
count upon six species of this genus from P. E., but I cannot state 
accurately without comparison. Of these M. piperata is decidedly 
most abundant. I have classed a yellow species independently, but it 
is probably only a mimetic form of the last named. The variety, if 
variety it is, appears constant in size and colour. Port Alfred is richer 
in species of the genus, and I have one from that locality not men- 
tioned by Krauss, awaiting christening. Gyprovulum Capensis is 
decidedly fitful, as regards worthy specimens. Cyprcea edentula occurs 
this year in thousands, and some are lovely shells with purple bands, 



* We have three Terebratulce — one wanting a name. 



Ba-irstow : Natural History Notes from South Africa. 163 

which fade rapidly. Lvponia JJgoensis is a rara ^'vh known to me by 
name only. Doubtless it may escape detection sometimes from its 
similarity to the former. G. moneta (sp. V) has been taken — come 
astray ! Trivia ojiisciis, one of my favourites, is fairly common, and 1 
have a smaller one not yet determined. Typhis (Fig. 6) is a scarcity 
here but abundant at the Kowie. One of my prizes is the large 
Turritella (Fig. 4), somewhat water- worn, bat bearing evidences of 
fulvous striae and markings. I picked it up during a Society ramble 
from Colga to Zwartkops. Unfortunately the outer lip of aperture is 
partly broken at the dotted line {vide fig.)? t>ut the shell, if not a cast- 
away from foreign seas, is a rarity. 

The Tenthia figured on plate (Fig. 7) was first dredged by Mr. Rous 
near the mouth of the Zwartkops (aboard the steam-tug ''James Searle"), 
since when numbers have been secured by various fishermen. I am 
endeavouring to obtain a specimen of the living animal from which to 
make a drawing. The figure was taken from a shell given to me by 
Mr. Rous. Cuttles abound in the sea, and I fancy their shells might 
be turned to some commercial advantage. In my beachian rambles I 
have met scores of fishermen in search of " sea-cats" for bait. I give 
an account of the method of capture employed, as expressed to me by 
a cute member of the craft : — " I lugs 'em hout wi' my 'ookstick. I 
smashes 'em hon the rocks huntil they're slickered. I turns 'em 
hinside hout, I 'angs 'em hon the 'ook, and when I'se got 'em hon, I 
works ontil I've got henuf, and then I goes 'ome and 'as refresher- 
ments !" Short, sweet, sufiicient ! I may here mention my welcome 
friend Argonauta argo^ the glorious Paper Nautilus, to be looked for 
after a south-easter anywhere along the beach, a cephalopod luxury to 
the eyes of naturalist CrcBsus, Lazarus, European, Colonial, or nigger, 
&c., &c. We have numerous species of Fissurella, of which the 
small hiatula is commonest, but it is hard to procure good specimens 
of the large ones in the adult stage. Mr. Woodward remarks twenty- 
two species of Trochus from S. Africa. I have only taken three or four 
on the Algoa coast, and none in remarkably good condition. The 
fragile Triton dolarius, with its shady green epidermis, is very 
abundant at all times, and I find the epidermis preserves moderately 
well. 

This genus is largely developed, and I have bagged some living 
monsters. They are extremely hardy, surviving after immersion in 
scalding water. Ancient specimens lose all their exterior beauty, and 
the rich bloom of colour disappears, enveloped in hideous punctated 
excrescences of carbonate of lime, and conglutinate rubbish. Our 



164 



The Naturalist. 



great Ranella is seldom taken in good condition. I received one 
minute species selected from a few thousand common shells from Port 
Alfred, which was submitted to Mr. Woodward and determined 
Ranella hastula, Reeve. At a first glance it looked like a flattened 
Scalaria, and, occurring simultaneously, might be overlooked. Since 
then Mr. Farquahar has obtained it on our coast. That gentleman 
possesses also a splendid Oliva^ and various other shells awaiting 
recognition. We have two, if not three, species of Haliotis, Of 
Buccinidce^ Bullia semiplicata {vide Woodward's diag.) generally visits 
us in broken parts. B, anmlata I never saw alive, but suspect it 
occurs quite close to the shore ; and the common B, acJiatina came 
sidling across my path with no instinctive forethought (!) during the 
first of many beach rambles, and insinuatingly demanded attention as 
an item of impressive Natural History. Since then I have made a 
point of watching these most friendly carnivorous mollusca. The tide 
is gradually casting ashore one of these immense Medusce, Here it 
comes, now settling its great smooth barrel-carcase on the sand, 
patiently awaiting decomposition, atmospheric or aqueous, or perhaps 
animal dissection. A family of Achatince is located somewhere about 
the vicinity. By some subtle communication the stranger is either 
seen, smelt, felt, or heard — it matters not which — and a regiment of 
snaily gluttons is soon established on the spot, gaining recruits at 
every moment, — all propelled by sordid selfishness, dread of losing a 
thumping dinner. To notice surroundings before Medusa arrives, and 
again after Medusa has arrived, is to wonder where such numbers of 
hungry elves have sprung, and why these were not perceived before. 
They draw nigh from the sea and wet sand to the point Medusa^ 
seldom from the earlier washed drier parts, and their tracks, increasing 
in complication with the addition of each fresh arrival, nevertheless 
denote a wonderful unity of interest, viz : pacification of appetite. Is 
their normal food jelly-fish ? Then they never need starve, for plenty 
comes ashore of size pro-digeous. 

(To he continued.) 

LASTR^A CRISTA! A NEAR THOKNE : ITS DISCOVERER 
AND ITS HISTORY. 

By F. Arnold Lees. 

It was with genuine pleasure I read James Backhouse's note (March 
No., p. 137) ; for the date he gives of the presumably earliest York- 
shire specimen gathered by William Casson helps not a little to clear 
away some of the mist in which the early history of this rare fern, in 



Lees : Lastr^ea Cristata near Thorne. 



165 



its connection with our county, is shrouded. It were much to be 
desired that our veteran botanists would give us more than they do 
of the information stored up in their herbaria, before it is for ever too 
late to convey it with the force of a personal witness — an element 
often undervalued — without which the dry record even of a duly dated 
and localised specimen in a collection is not unfrequently liable to a 
not- to-be-rebutted, if un-provable, assertion of ' transposition of 
label,' ' inadvertent confusion,' &c. ; more especially in those cases 
where the fact happens to be singularly notable, or in one way or 
another subversive of some closet-naturalist's pet latter-day general- 
isation I No one who has had much to do with the overhauling of 
herbaria but must admit that something more or less inexplicable to 
him is always found ; and therewith comes the not-to-be-satisfied 
wish that he could have the author at his elbow to settle with the 
desiderated oral particulars such critical points of interest as are 
otherwise peculiarly liable to be misconstrued, or read variously. 

What has been published as to the occurrence of Lastrcea cristata 
in South Yorkshire is worth recounting. Edward Newman, in the 
first edition of his British Ferns (1844), makes no mention of it as a 
Yorkshire plant at all. Henry Baines, in his Flora of Yorkshire 
(1840), does not name it as a Thorne plant, or indeed at all ; either, 
if my view be correct as to the ^ A spidium cristatum ' given (loc. cit., p. 
123), as occurring * on Plumpton Rocks, near Knaresbro'V hemgnot 
our Lastrcda^ but the cristate-fronded variety of the male fern (Z. Mlix- 
Mas.)* Dr. Carrington says this Plumpton plant appears to have 
been L, spi/ailosa, but that does not occur on the rocks in question, 
L, MliX'Mas (in three or four varieties), and L. dilatata, with Folt/- 
f odium vulgare only growing thereon. 

Later by fourteen years. Baker, in his Supplement to Baines 
(1854), gives L, cristata., judiciously, as * incognit,' remarking on the 
necessity for re-observance. 

* Note. — I am, perhaps, confirmed in this by the very earliest record for tho 
* cristatum^'' in connection with Yorkshire, which occurs. Jonathan Salt, in his 
MSS. Flora Sheffieldiensis, 1800 (in the library of the Sheffield Lit. and Phil. 
Society), has ' P. cristatum. — In woods not uncommon,' and he had, undoubtedly, 
no knowledge of the species under consideration, yclept ' Ehrhart's ' bog-fern by 
Newman. There was a Polypodium cristatum of Linnaeus ; but the name as used 
by writers from 1800 to 1840, clearly shews that they had rather the original 
Folypodium spinulosum in view; although Newman (1. c, p. 216) distinctly says 
he could not make out Lastrcea spinulosa to be either the Fohjpodium spinulosum^ 
as supposed by Willdenow, or the Linnaean P. cristatum^ as supposed by Bolton 
and Withering. 



166 



The Naturalist, 



Next, we are presented witti a curious record, the warrant for 
which I have not been able to clearly ascertain. In Miall and 
Carrington's W. R. Flora (p. 57) occur the words — L, cristata 
(crested brake-fern), Thorne Moor, near Doncaster, Baines V This 
query I can only assume to have been put to shew some doubt as to 
who really was the authority for some rumour which reached them as 
to the fern growing there. Whether they doubted the correctness of 
the station, or the species, I have no means of knowing ; but 
probably the latter, for the authors give ' Ladrcda crktata ' amongst 
a number of other names (p. 93) probably erroneous. Could a 
forgetting of the name of the communicator have inspired a doubt, 
and so led to the mark of interrogation ? It is worth remembering, as 
to this, that the Flora was issued in 1862 — a date seven years sub- 
sequent to that in which Mr. Casson's specimen in Herb. Backhouse 
was gathered — yet none of the names (Backhouse, Casson, or Hardy) 
appear in the list of contributors from whom records or specimens 
were received, given at the end of the work. 

I, myself, first gathered Lastrcea cristata in August, 1872, along 
with Lathyrus cristata and Peucedanum palustre (only again re-found in 
1883, by Henry Johnson, of Barnsley), in a bushy, boggy place (an 
alder car if I recollect rightly), not on the ^ Waste ' exactly, but upon 
the less open border much nearer Thorne. I hit upon the one station 
after much roundabout rambling ; but previously in 1870-71, or early 
in 1872, I had received the general locality from John Hardy, with 
whom I was at one time in correspondence ; and I, knowing not 
then aught of a Mr. Casson, presumed Hardy to be the discoverer, as 
he was certainly the communicator to me of that and other facts 
which I duly acknowledged in the preface to " West Yorkshire^ 

I willingly reject, as very improbable, the idea that Mr. John 
Hardy could have found the bog-fern in question before 1856. I 
received no specimen or date, which led me to search so carefully for 
myself. Probably Mr. Hardy himself first learnt of the fern's 
occurrence Irom Mr. Casson in some more or less indirect way, living 
on the spot, as it were, as the latter gentleman did. Honour, however, 
where honour is due ! It is part of the plan of my W^est Yorkshire 
Flora to give date with name of the earliest notice of each constituent 
species ; so that now, thanks to Mr. Backhouse's timely note, the 
record stands : 1856, Wm. Casson, Thorne." 



NOTES ON THE VERTEBRATE FAUNA OF YORKSHIRE, 
1881-1883. 



By Wm. Eagle Clarke, F.L.S., and Wm, Denison Roebuck. 
f Continued. J 

17. Ruticilla titys (Scop.). Blackstart, 

Mr. Bailey's note, that he has observed this species at Flamborough, 
in October and November, having been doubted in high quarters, 
it is interesting to know that Clarke shot one at Spurn, in the last 
week of October, 1882, and saw another there about the same date 
in 1883. It is probably a regular autumn visitant. 

18 or 19. Gyaneculai^. ^"^Qcm^). Bluethroat. 

Spurn Head, one shot in Clarke's presence on the 11th of 
September, 1882, and another seen the same day. The specimen 
procured was an immature bird, in which state of plumage the two 
species C. leucocyana and (7. suecica are indistinguishable. 

21. Daullas luscinia (E.). Nightingale. 

The northern range of this bird has been extended as far as 
Scarborough, where it undoubtedly bred in 1882 (W. Robinson). 
At Staveley, near Boroughbridge, two pairs nested in 1881 
(Knubley), and a pair nested near Harrogate in 1883 (Inchbald). 

37. Acrocephalus streperm (Vieill.). Reed Warbler, 

Seebohm, in his " British Birds," remarks that it seems very 
doubtful whether the Reed Warbler breeds in Great Britain north 
of the Humber." This surprising conjecture is of course quite 
erroneous, for the species is known to breed quite commonly in 
various localities which are not only north of the Humber, but some 
of them actually in the northern half of the county, as for instance 
Staveley near Boroughbridge, and Knaresborough, in both of which 
localities it nests annually. It is also a regular nesting species near 
Leeds, and at Hornsea Mere in the East Riding it breeds in great 
abundance. This is not the only instance in which we have to 
regret the vague and sketchy manner in which so important a 
subject as the distribution in Britain of British birds is treated in so 
valuable a work. 

71a. Lanius major Pallas. Pallas^ s Great Grey Shike. 

This form is allowed specific rank by Mr. Seebohm in his work on 
British Birds. From the number of Yorkshire specimens that 



168 



The Naturalist. 



have come under Clarke's notice, it is in all probability not only an 
annual winter visitant, but, perhaps, of much more frequent 
occurrence than is suspected. 
93. Liyiota linaria (L.)- Mealy Redpoll. 

The year 1881 may be added to the list of seasons in which this 
species occurred in large flocks in the county. 

96. Linota flamrostris (L.). Twite. 

Mr. Allis's statement that this bird had bred on Thome Waste 
is paralleled by the observations of the Rev. H. H. Slater (Nat., 
1882, p. 179), who found it nesting on Pilmoor, near Thirsk, a 
similar low-lying locality. 

107. Emberiza cirliis L. Cirl Bunting. 

Additional occurrence : Fen Bog, near Whitby, a female shot on 
the 28th of February, 1882, now in the Whitby Museum. Two 
others were seen at the same time and place (Stephenson). 

108. Emberiza hortulana L. Ortolan Bunting. 

The specimen captured off the Yorkshire coast, which served for 
Bewick's figure, is now, according to Seebohm's " British Birds " 
(vol. ii., p. 153) in the Newcastle Museum. 

109. Emberiza rustica Pall. jRustic Bunting. 

An addition to the avifauna — an accidental visitant from North 
Eastern Europe and Northern Asia. 

Easington, a female (?), shot September 17th, 1881, (Clarke, 
Zool., 1881, p. 465 ; Nat., 1881, p. 57 ; Ibis, 1882, p. 181.) 

133. Gypselus melba (L.). Alpine Swift. 

Additional occurrence : Huddersfield, a female brought in the flesh 
to Mr. S. L. Mosley, on the 2nd of June, 1881, which had been 
found in an exhausted condition a day or two before (Mosley, MS.) 

139. Picus mionr L. Lesser Spotted Woodpecker. 

Mr. Thomas Carter, of Masham, informs us that this species occurs 
about Aysgarth, in Wensleydale, and around Masham. 

141. lynx torquilla L. Wryneck. 

Is an annual summer visitant to Walton Park, near Wakefield 
(H. B. Hewetson). 

143. Goracias garrulus L. 'Roller. 

One was seen by Mr. H. T. Archer on the banks of the Wharfe, 
near Ilkley, about the end of July, 1881. (Archer, Field, August 
6th, 1881, p. 193, and MS.) 



Clarke and Roebuck : Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire. 169 



152. Asio accipitrinus (Pall). Short-eared OwL 

A specimen, shot at Spurn, by Clarke, in October, 1879, is in the 
Arctic form of plumage, described by Seebohm (British Birds, i. 
72). 

Falco sparverms L. American Kestrel, 

In the Zoologist for 1883, p. 126, Mr. James Backhouse, Jun., 
records the occurrence of this species near Helmsley, in May, 1882. 
We have very carefully investigated the evidence adduced, and 
regret that we are unable to accept the bird as a member of the 
Yorkshire fauna, as there are certain features in the case which are 
in our opinion fatal to its claim for admission. 

186. Pandion haliaetus (L.). Osprey, 

During the autumns of 1882 and 1883 this species appears to have 
been much more frequently observed than it has of late years, when, 
indeed, it was comparatively almost unknown. 

187. Phalacrocorax carho (Ju.). Corynorant, 

This bird ceased to breed at Huntcliffe (not ^mcliffe, as stated in 
the Handbook), near Saltburn, some years ago, but now breeds in 
the cliffs near and at Kettleness (T. H. Nelson, MS.). 

190. Ardea cinerea L. Heron. 

Mr. H. B. Hewetson informs us that there is a Heronry at Nostell 
Priory, the seat of Mr. Rowland Winn, M.P. ; and Mr. Backhouse, 
Jun., of one, numbering about fifty nests, at Moreby Park, near 
York. 

193. Ardea garzdta L. Little Egret. 

Additional occurrence : Aike [incorrectly spelt Ake] Carr, near 
Beverley, one obtained about 1840 (Ruskin, The Eagle's Nest, 
p. 170). 

196. Ardetta minuta (L.). Little Bittern. 

Additional occurrence : Goole, a young male obtained, September 
23rd, 1881, now in the possession of W. E. Clarke (Bunker, Nat., 
1881, p. 66.) 

199. Botat^rus lentiginosus (M-ont.). American Bittern. 

Additional occurrence : Harsley Castle, Welbury, near Northaller- 
ton, one shot by the Hon. W. Dawnay, October 27th, 1882, which 
was examined by Mr. J. Harrison, of Wilstrop. 

206. Anser segetum (Gm.). Bean Goose. 

Mr. Boyes is of opinion that the immense flocks noted as formerly 
visiting the Wolds, were not of this species, but were composed of 



170 



The Naturalist. 



Pink-footed Geese. Our authority for the statement was Mr. Arthur 
Strickland, as quoted by Allis in his report on Yorkshire Birds, 
read before the British Association, in 1844. 

219. Anas doscas L. Mallard. 

Mr. Boyes informs us that the decoy at Meaux, in Holderness, the 
site of which is still to be seen, was about a quarter or half an acre 
in extent, with four pipes. 

220. Chaulelasmus dreperus L. Gadwall. 

A pair, male and female, were shot on the river Hull near Beverley, 
in the middle of May, 1882 (Dobree, Nat. 1882, vii. p. 185). 

221. Spatula clypeata (L.). Shoveller, 

This species bred in 1880 on Thorne Waste, a nest with four eggs 
being taken by the late Mr. Wm. Talbot of Wakefield, and others. 
About the year 1866 it bred near Masham, and in 1882 a pair 
again appeared at the same place, but owing to disturbance did not 
remain (T. Carter). 

222. Querquedula crecca (L.), Teal. 

Breeds not uncommonly on Thorne Waste (Clarke) ; and in the 
summer of 1883 a pair bred on the moors near Masham (T. Carter). 

223. Querquedula circia (L.). Gaugaiiey. 

Beverley — a nest with nine eggs found by Mr. J*. C. Swailes, who 
almost trod on the sitting female, on the 21st May, 1882 (Boyes, 
MS.) The first instance known of its breeding in the county, so 
far as we are aware. 

224. Dafila acuta (L.). Pintail. 

Two pairs remained on a small pond on a warren at Kilnsea, in 
Holderness, until late April, 1881 (P. W. Lawton). 
229. Fuligula cristata (Leach). Tufted Duck. 

Seen at Hornsea Mere on the 12th of June, 1883, by Mr. J. C. 
Swailes. Sir William Milner (Zool. 1854, p. 4441) also observed 
it in summer, and it doubtless breeds there. 

246. Columha livia Bonnat. Rock Dove. 

The statement in the Yorkshire Vertebrata that this species is 
reported to breed in inland localities has been criticised by some 
correspondents ; but Clarke's request for specimens has never been 
complied with. 

247. Columba oenas L. Stock Dove. 

Regarding the spread of this species, Clarke contributed some 
Yorkshire notes to Mr. Harvie-Brown's valuable paper read before 



Clarke and Koebuck : Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire. 171 

the Royal Physical Society of Edinburgh on the 21st of February, 
1883, On the Stock-dove (Columba oenas), with remarks upon its 
extension of range in Great Britain." From this we quote Clarke's 
concluding remarks, which appear as a footnote : — " Since the above 
was penned I have instituted further inquiries into the range and 
spread of the stock-dove in Yorkshire, with the chief result that I 
am informed, on the reliable authority of Mr. Boyes, that 
warreners now alive remember this bird being numerous on the 
Wolds sixti/ years ago^ when it was their perquisite. Thus it is a 
most interesting fact that at a period when the stock-dove was 
almost, if not quite, unknown elsewhere in the county, it was 
common on the vast wolds of the East Riding. 1 am inclined to 
think that Yorkshire and other neighbouring counties have been 
peopled with stock-doves from this source, for with the gradual 
enclosure and cultivation of these great warrens we find a simulta- 
neous and equally gradual spread of this species has taken place." 

252. Gaccabis rufa (L.). Bed-legged Partridge. 

Mr. C. -Fullerton Smith (Field, Feb. 10, 1883, p. 184) gives 
notes on the introduction of this species into Yorkshire. At 
Hornby Castle they were turned down in 1846-7, but afterwards 
shot off. The same thing took place at Swinton, near Masham. At 
Ingleby, in the North Riding, some twenty years ago, about fifty 
brace were turned down by Lord de L'Isle, and now, on the 
neighbouring manors of Ormsby and Deighton a few brace are shot 
every season. This information is interesting, and supplies material 
upon the subject of the introduction of this species into the 
county, which we were unable to obtain in 1881. 

253. Gaccabis petrosa (Gm.). Barhnry Partridge, 

Mr. Boyes informs us that the Beverley specimen was an escape ; 
he had an opportunity of examining the bird, and found it to be 
pinioned. This species must therefore be eliminated from the 
county list. 

264. Porzana bailloni (Vieill.) BailMs Crake. 

The Goole specimen proved on examination to be an immature 
example of C, marietta, the spotted crake (Clarke). Additional 
occurrence: Holmpton, in Holderness, one shot in 1880, now in 
the collection of the Rev. H. H. Slater (Slater, MS.). 

272. Otis tarda, L. Grsdt Bustard. 

Additional information has been obtained on the former occurrence 
of this fine species, which it is proposed to reserve for a future article 



172 



The Naturalist. 



on this species in Yorkshire. We would remark, that in his 
admirable continuation of Newton's Yarrell, Saunders has re- 
produced the old mis-statement as to Hawold being in Lincoln- 
shire, whereas, as we have already indicated, it is in Yorkshire. 

275. CEdicnemits crepitans, Gm. Stone Curlew. 

A pair of this species, which is now becoming very rare in the 
Southern Wolds, bred near Market Weighton in 1881. 

299. Tringa minuta Leisl. Little Stint, 

302. Tringa suharquata (Giild). Curlew Sandpiper, 

Both species were particularly numerous on the coast in late August 
and early September, 1881 ; and in the early autumn of 1883 the 
Little Stint was again numerous (Clarke). 

310. Totanus macularius (L.). Spotted Sandpiper, 

The specimen recorded from the Tees proved to be a Green Sand- 
piper (J. H. Gurney, Junr., Kambles of a Naturalist, p. 255.) 

311. Totanus glareola Wood Sandpiper, 

Additional occurrences : Coatham Marsh, adult shot, August 6th, 
1881 (T. H. Nelson, ZooL, 1882, p. 91); Beverley, one shot in 
the spring of 1882, in the collection of Mr. F. Boyes (Boyes, MS.) ; 
Bridlington Quay, one shot mid-August, 1883 (Clarke); Easing- 
ton, Holderness, one shot early autumn, 1883 (Clarke). 

314. Totanus calidris (L.). Redshank. 

Bred on Skip with (Riccall) Common, in 1882, and at Masham 
in 1883. 

316. Totanus fuscus (L.). Spotted Redshank, 

Additional occurrence : Tees mouth, an adult shot on the 15th 
September, 1881. (Nelson, Zool., 1882, p. 93.) 

323. Numenius arquata (L.). Curlew. 

Breeds commonly on Thorne Waste, a vast tract of heatherland on 
the Lincolnshire border of the county, and very little above sea- 
level. 

326. Sterna dougalli Mont. Roseate Tern, 

Mr. T. H. Nelson informs us that the five recorded for Tees Bay 
by Argus " were Common Terns, and not this species. 

332. Sterna fuliginosa Gm. Sooty Tern. 

As suspected (Handbook, p. xxxvii,) this specimen has proved to 
be a Black Tern. 



Clarke and Roebuck : Vertebrate Fauna of Yorkshire. 173 



342. Larus ridibundus L. Brown-headed GulL 

A few pairs bred in 1881 and 1882, in a marshy field by the River 
Aire, just outside the Leeds borough boundary, and in 1883 they 
bred in some numbers on Strensall Common, but their eggs, about 
forty in number, were taken. The discussion in various numbers 
of the " Field" for February and March, 1884, has added nothing 
to the information which was in our possession at the time of 
framing our original account. 

352. Larus leucopterus^ Faber. Iceland GulL 

Additional occurrence : Spurn, a mature female and a bird of the 
year, shot December, 1882, now in Clarke's possession. 

359. Procellaria leucorrhoa^ Vieill. Leaches Petrel, 

Additional occurrences : Riplingham, near Beverley, one in 
December, 1881, (Dobree, Nat., 1882, p. 100); Whitby, one 
obtained near, in the possession of Mr. C. Bagnall (Stephenson). 

362. Puffinus griseus (Gm.) Sooty Shearwater. 

At the time of publishing the Handbook, we were unable to 
discriminate between the records of P. griseus and P, major. 
We can now give the following occurrences of this species : — 
Whitby, one shot in September, 1870, now in the museum 
(Stephenson). One shot in Bridlington Bay, 1872, by Mr. 
Elton, is referred to this species (Macpherson, Zool., 1883, p. 121). 
Clarke examined a fine pair in September last, which had been 
shot at Flamborough. Redcar, one shot September 17th, 1883 
(Nelson, Zool., April, 1884, p. 147.) This species is not, how- 
ever, new to the Yorkshire fauna, as Mr. Nelson supposes (see 
Handbook, p. 85). 

FISHES. 

5. Lamna cornuhica (Gm.). Porbeagle, 

In August, 1883, four were captured alive in ' Bridlington 
Bay, one of which, examined by Clarke, was eight feet long. 

6. Alopecias vulpes (Gm.). Fox Shark, Thrasher. 

One captured on the 19th Sept., 1883, at Hornsea, eleven feet in 

length (Dobree, Naturalist, 1883, ix. 69). 
13. Lcemargus borealis {^coresbj), Greenland Shark. 

Whitby, one caught by Thomas Langley and brought into the 

port, Feb. 7, 1882 (T. Stephenson, MS.). 
16. Torpedo hebetans Lowe. Gr amp-ray. Torpedo. 

Additional to the Yorkshire fauna : Easington, one captured on 

the 14th of April, 1882 (Clarke, Zool, 1882, p. 193) ; Bridlington, 



174 



The Naturalist. 



one washed ashore and captured alive in the .spring of 1883 (Thos. 
Bovnton). 

18. Raja maculata L. Homely 7i Ray. 

Additional to the fauna : Mr. Winson, the coxswain of the Spurn 
lifeboat, who is a practical fisherman and a careful observer, on 
being shown the plate of this species in Couch's British Fishes/' 
recognised it as one which he has caught commonly at ' California/ 
a fishing-ground ten miles off the coast between Flambor jugh and 
Withernsea. 

20. l^aja circitlaris Couch. Sandy Ray. 

The cuckoo ray {Raja miraletui) of Couch, which is a variety of this 
species, has been observed by Mr. Winson as taken in * California/ 

32. Lab rax lupus (Lacep.). Basse, 

A specimen of this fish, weighing eleven pounds, which was caught 
at Whitby on the 22nd November, 1883, is noteworthy on account 
of the date. It contained a quantity of spawn (T. Stephenson, 
MS.). 

58. Zeus faher L. Doree. John Doree. 

At Bridlington this appears to be a not uncommon fish, occurring 
regularly every summer. 

61. Brama Rati Bl. Ray'^s Sea-bream. 

On Whitby Sands, a very fine specimen was found alive on the 
2nd of November, 1882 ; it measured 24 inches in length, 19 J 
in girth, and weighed six pounds. It is now in the Whitby Museum 
(Thos. Stephenson, MS.) 

62. Lam'pris luna (Gm.). Opali. King fish. 

Spurn, one occurred a few years ago (Clarke, MS.). 

70. Auxis Rochei (Eisso). Plain Bonito. 

An addition to the fauna ; off Whitby, two occurrences in 1882. 
The first specimen was captured on the 9th September ; it 
measured two feet four inches in length, and is now in the Museum. 
The other, which was two feet in length and 6;| lbs in weight, was 
captured on the 18th of the same month (Thos. Stephenson, MS.). 

85. Agonus cataphradus (L.). Pogge. Armed Bullhead. 

When we wrote in the Handbook of these being taken in lobster- 
pots at Spurn, we were under a misapprehension. They are taken 
within the Humber estuary, by means of the seine- net, which is 
used for the purpose of obtaining bait for the lobster-pots. 

106. Atherina presbyter Cuv. Atherine. Sand-smelt. 

Additional evidence of the occurrence of this fish is to be found 



Clarke and Eoebuck : Vektebrate Fauna of YoRKSHiiiE. 175 

in a note in Science Gossip for 1866, p. 254, wlierein Commander 
Knocker, R.N., states that he had obtained many specimens, 
especially out of a dam erected for the pier-works, at Brid- 
lington. 

111. Mucjil septentrionalis Giinth. Lesser Grey Mullet, 

We are able to confirm, on unexceptionable authority, the occur- 
rence of this fish. Specimens taken by Clarke at Spurn Point, 
just within the estuary of the Humber, on the 3ist May, 1882, 
submitted to Dr. Giinther, were pronviunced by him to be unques- 
tionably of this species. 

115. G aster osteus pungitius \a, T en- spined Stickleback. 

Occurs at Hobmoor and Bootham Stray, near York (E. J. Gibbins, 
MS.). 

121. Trachypterus arcticus i^xmm.). Deal Fish. Vaagmaer, 

An addition to the fauna : Flamborough,.one was captured alive in 
perfect condition on the rocks near the Head, on the 17th April, 
1882 (Boynton, Field, April 22nd, 1882, p. 535; Naturalist, 1882, 
vii. 185). 

122. Regalecus hanksii (C. and V.) Banks' Oar Fish. 
Bridlington Quay, one washed ashore on the 7th of April, 1882. 
It measured 19 feet in length, and 21 inches in depth, and thus 
appears to be the largest specimen on record (Boynton, MS. ; 
Dobree, Naturalist, 1882, vii. 185.) 

123. Regalecus grillii (Linds.) Sild-Kung. 

The specimen which in our Handbook is recorded under R. banksii 
as taken at Staithes, in January, 1880, is considered by Dr. Day, 
in his Fishes of Great Britain and Ireland, as being probably — 
from the dimensions given — referable to this form, which, however, 
he regards as merely a variety of R, banksii. 

127. Ctenolabrus rupestris (L.). Jagds Goldsinny, 

Whitby, March 8th, 1883, a large number, variously estimated at 
from 40 to 100, were washed ashore. One brought alive 
to Mr. Thomas Stephenson was compared by him with Dr. Day's 
plates, and the description of it which he communicated to us 
affords no reason to doubt the accuracy of his diagnosis. 

134. Leuciscus erythropJitJialmus (L.). Rudd. 

Mr. Clifton R. Garwood, of Acomb, near York (writing in the 
Field, June 9, 1883, p. 765) noted having seen the Azurine, or 
Blue Roach (^ variety of the Rudd) in the river Ouse, amongst a 
shoal of roach, bleak, and dace. 



176 



The Naturalist. 



201. Salmo farlo L. Far, — Swaledale Trout of Dr. Day, 

Under this name Dr. Day (Fishes of Great Britain and Ireland, 
ii. 100) describes and figures a variety which is comparatively 
rather broad, and in colour the most beautifully tinted form he has 
seen. The specimens were sent to him by Mr. George Brook, ter., 
by whom they were taken in the Oxnop Beck, Upper Swaledale. 

223. EngrauUs encrasicJiolus (h.). Anchovy. 

An addition to the fauna, previously overlooked by us. 
Bridlington, two specimens caught on the 17th Oct., 1866 (H. H. 
Knocker, Science Gossip, Nov. 1866, p. 254). 

236. Nerophis cequoreus (L.). Mquoreal Pipe-fish. 

Whitby, one washed ashore in March, 1883, had 44 rays in the 
dorsal fin, and measured 15 j inches in length (Stephenson, MS.). 

241. Balistes capriscus Gm. File-fish. 

Dr. Day, at p. 269 of his work, cites from the Zoologist for 1868, 
p. 1027, a record of the occurrence of this species at Flamborough. 
Of this we were fully cognizant at the time of writing the 
Handbook, the result of our enquiries being that Mr. Bailey 
assured us that the specimen was an Opah, or King-fish. 

243. Orthagoriscus mola (L.). Short Sunfish, 

Bridlington, five in August, 1866, mostly of small size (H. H. 
Knocker, Science Gossip, 1866, p. 254). Bridlington, one which 
weighed nearly 250 ft)S. was shot on the 16th of August, 1882 
(Bridlington Quay Gazette, August 19th, 1882.) 

244. Orthagoriscus truncatus (Retz.) Oblong Sunjish. 

Additional to the fauna : Mr. Stephenson has sent us an extract 
from the Whitby Repository for December, 1867, recording the 
capture of an Orthagoriscus ohlongus, oblong sunfish/' at Whitby, 
in the November of that year, which measured five feet across the 
fins, and five feet from head to tail. It was sold to Mr. Grier for 
the museum at Huddersfield. 

In conclusion, we have to acknowledge our indebtedness to numer- 
ous correspondents, whose notes are acknowledged in the text, and it is 
our duty to record our special obligation to Mr. Thomas Stephenson, 
of Whitby, for the number and value of the notes he has sent us from 
time to time ; we have also to thank Mr. George Roberts for 
drawing our attention to a few published records which had escaped 
our attention, and Messrs. Geo. Brook, ter., Thos. Carter, and E. J. 
Gibbins, for their response to our note inviting co-operation. 



fvahtfall for Parr^. 





Height 

of 
gauge 
above 


Rain- 
fall, 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 

of 

heaviest 
Fall. 




Days 






Fall. 




sea 
level. 






1884. 


1883. 




HUDDERSFIELD (Dalton) ... 

(J. W. Kobson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
1-67 


13 


8-99 


*7'90 


4 


0-41 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny)... 


183 


1-45 


15 


7-42 


4-93 t 


4 


0-40 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


1-79 


14 


7-86 


6-90 J 


4 


0-67 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Kawson) 


365 


2-82 


16 


12-75 


13-28 


4 


0-97 


Barnsley ... (Dr. Sadler)... 


350 


1-78 


17 


•7.24 


7-09 


3&4 


0-41 


Ingbirchworth (Mr. Taylor) 


853 


2-21 


17 


12-45 


11*36 


4 


0-47 


W^ENTWORTH Castle (Mr, 
Fisher) 




1 -Qi^ 
1 vO 


in 


8-11 


8*92 


A 

4 


0*49 


n /T XT • \ 


25 


1-60 


8 


6-42 


5-66 


y 


•36 


Hull (Derringham) (W^m. 

Lawton) 




i.D/ 


io 


5-93 


4-40 § 


Q 

o 


'33 


SCARBORO' (A. Rowntree)... 


130 


2-16 


17 


6-90 


5-39 II 


31 


•39 


Thirsk (Baldersby) 


100 


2-44 


11 


8-38 




4 


0-76 


(W. Gregson) 






Masham (Thos. Carter j ... 


269 


2-90 


15 


10-56 




4 


1.07 


Shadwell (Geo. Paul) ... 


500 


1-78 


12 






4 





* Average to date for 17 years, 1866-83. 
t Average of 30 years, 1853-62, & 1865-84. t Average of 15 years, 1870-84. 
§ Average of 34 years, 1850-83. || Average fall for Mar. (18 years). 



Ornithological Notes from Barnsley. — March 22nd, a flock of 
long-tailed tits noted in a garden near Silkstone ; the wheatear reported 
by Mr. Richardson, of Goole, as usual, the first spring migrant " ; the 
gold-crested wren observed at Tankersley ; willow- warbler heard in the 
Tale of Went, very early ; 27th, starlings breeding about the Parish 
schools and in the town ; white-sparrow at the Oaks Colliery, a pair near 
the L. and Y. Kailway, Barnsley, supposed to be breeding ; April 2nd, 
chiflf-chaff heard in the vale of Went ; 4th, sand martins seen at 
Stainborough, Wentworth Castle Park, by Rev. W. Elmhirst ; also at 
Crane Moor, Thurgoland, on following day, and also a pair at the same 
place by Rev. D. Johnson. April 11th, on our first local excursion to 
Conisborough and Edlington Wood, whitethroat, sand-martin, chifi'-chafi,. 
willow- warbler, the only migrants ; reed bunting, magpies, jays in 
abundance ; April 14th, the house martin reported by Mr. T. Ormerod, 
vale of Calder ; April 18th, tree-pipit, and yellow or Ray's wagtail 
reported by Mr. G. Roberts, near Wakefield. — T. Lister, 



178 



The Naturalist. 



Northern Range of the Sand Lizard.— As Messrs. Roebuck and 
Clarke are evidently imder the impression that the true Sand lizard is 
not found so far north as Yorkshire, (Nat. ix., p. 149), they will be in- 
terested to know that it occurs abundantly on the sandhills, at Soiithport, 
in Lancashire. I have captured numbers there, and seen many more. 
The Natterjack toad too, is common in the same locality. — G. T. Porritt. 

Effects of the Mild Winter on Insect Life. — The unusual mildness 
of the past winter has not been without its influence on insect life. 
Coleoptera have turned up in abundance, and as regards the lepidoptera, 
the spring feeding larvae of the Noctuidse are in greatly increased 
numbers, and I think this promises well for the abundance of the late 
summer and early autumn moths. Hybernated larvse have appeared 
early, and the same may be said of lepidopterous imagos. Gonepteryx 
rhaniMi was flying about Cambridge very shortly after New Year's day, 
and Vanessa io woke up the third week in February. The first specimen 
of Vanessa vrticce 1 saw, was in the first week in March, and Pieris rapce 
was out near the end of the month, and flying about in numbers. 
Tceniocampce began to come out the second week in February ; I speci- 
ally noticed Tceniocampa instabilis at that time. I drove over to Kirtling, 
near Newmarket, a few days after the commencement of the year, and 
found mines of Nepticula aurella, with living larvse inside very numerous ; 
and a day or two afterwards I found them at Cambridge, although in 
much less abundance. — Albert H. Waters, Mill Road, Cambridge. 
April 8th, 1884. 

OBITUARY. 

It is with very deep regret that we have this month to chronicle the 
deaths of two prominent members of our Union. 

William Prest was born at York, on May 7th, 1824, and died after u 
brief illness on April 7th, 1884. His loss will be severely felt by the lepi- 
dopterists, not only of his own county, but of the country generally, for he 
had been for probably more years than any other person now living in 
the county, an exceedingly diligent and energetic collector, and had 
consequently taken and distributed among the collections of the country 
scores of rarities, from localities in which many of them had scarcely been 
suspected of occurring. His best single take was perhaps the fine 
Euholia moeniata, among broom, near York, on August 19th, 1866 ; but 
very many other species of almost equal interest were secured by him. 
His enthusiasm in his favourite study never seemed to flag, and we have, 
when out collecting with him, often been struck with his pleasure on the 
capture of beautiful and perfect specimens of comparatively common 
species, and species which indeed he must, one would think, have taken 
almost every season for years. Nor shall we soon forget the delight with 
which he brought to us on the ground, the specimens of Enpitliecia 
suhciliata, taken in the Copgrove Woods, August Bank Holiday, 1876 ; 
and those of Acidalia straminata (which, whilst capturing, he believed to 



Notes and Queries. 



179 



be A. circeUata)^ on Thorne Waste^ July 9th, 1881 ; nor the glee with 
which he confirmed our suspicion of Basistrigalis,^^ when we took to him 
the first example secured at Edlington Wood, on August 4th, 1879. He 
was, too, the first to bring to notice the variety angelicata of Eupithecia 
alhipionctatay and most of the examples of this form now in British 
collections, were bred by him from Bishop's Wood larvae. Since the 
discovery of Scoparia co7ispicualis, he had collected great numbers of that 
insect, for immediately on seeing Mr. Hodgkinson's specimens, he 
recognized it as a species he had been taking for years in Sandburn 
Wood, York. During the last few years too, he had a great partiality 
for varieties, and the beautiful and extraordinary forms of many species 
he obtained, notably of Abraxas grossulariata and A. ulmata, Cidaria 
russata and C. immanata, Acronycta ligiistri and A. ynenyanthirJis, and 
very many others, were the admiration (we had almost said envy), of all 
who saw them. Mr. Prest was a frequent and constant contributor to 
entomological literature, and his notes and papers may be found almost 
continuously from the days of the first volume of the Entomologists 
Weekly Intelligencer," in 1859, to the recent volumes of the Emtomo- 
logist ", his last paper On a form of the genus Zygcena,^' appearing in 
the December, 1883, number of that journal. Twenty-four years ago, on 
January 2nd, 1860, he was elected vice-president of the York Entomolo- 
gical Society, and we believe, had been in office in that and the York and 
District Field Naturalists' Society which followed it, almost continuously 
since, acting as secretary to the latter ever since its commencement about 
fifteen years ago, up to the present year. And on the formation of 
sections in connection with the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, he was, on 
December 2nd, 187 6, appointed first president of that for Entomology, 
an office which he held (though not continuously) for three years. — G.T.P. 

Joseph Wainwright, F.L.S., died somewhat suddenly of bronchitis, 
accompanied by inflammation of the lungs, at his residence, Springfield 
House, Outwood, Wakefield, on April 10th, aged 71. He was for many 
years a prominent member of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, and was 
for some time, five or six years if Iwe remember rightly, down to 187 6 
inclusive, its president — prior to the change of name from the West- 
Riding Consolidated Naturalists' Society. He took a warm and active 
interest in the movement for the improvement of its methods and 
procedure, which brought about its re-organization in 1877, and its 
extension to the whole county under its present name. He has also 
taken part in its proceedings ever since, and was present at the annual 
meeting at Barnsley so recently as March 4th last. The Wakefield 
Naturalists' Society was formed by invitation from Mr. Wainwright to 
about a dozen gentlemen, who met at his office in George Street, on 
April 21st, 1871. He was chosen first president of that Society, a position 
which he held continuously up to the time of his death. Mr. Wain- 
wright was a botanist, and was especially a lover of exotic and cultivated 
flowers. During the summer months he frequently threvv open his 



180 



The Naturalist. 



grounds and conservatories, a generosity which hundreds, nay thousands, 
have appreciated by visiting Springfield, since Mr. Wainwright went 
there. He frequently officiated as judge at horticultural shows in various 
parts of the country, and was indeed, well known in the horticultural 
world. When the Wakefield Paxton Society was formed some years ago, 
he was elected ' its president, another office which he retained up to the 
time of his death. Mr. Wainwright was elected a Fellow of the Linnean 
Society, on June 17th, 1856. It may also be added, that he was for 
about 20 years a prominent member of the Wakefield Town Council, and 
occupied a seat on the Aldermanic bench for about 15 years (in 1863-64 
acting as Deputy-Mayor), until 1874, when he terminated his connection 
with the Corporation. 



Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Meeting, 
March 31st, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) occupying the chair. — Mr. 
H. H. Corbett, Stockport, read a paper entitled The causes producing 
localisation in insects, with special reference to British lepidoptera," in 
which he described what he believed to be the chief causes which affected 
the distribution of British butterflies and moths, explaining how these 
causes would take efiect. After the paper the compilation of the local 
lepidopterous fauna was discussed ; and on the suggestion of the president 
it was decided that instead of a mere local list a work be compiled which 
should treat of the butterflies and moths of the two counties from which 
the society takes its title. The secretary (Dr. Ellis) ofifered to undertake 
this task, and information witn reference to local butterflies was proceeded 
with. — J. W. Ellis, Hon. Sec. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — Meeting, March 17th, Dr. B. 
Carrington, F.R.S.E., in the chair. — The hon. secretary placed upon the 
table a large packet of specimens of Characece, which he had received from 
Mr. Arthur Bennett, of Croydon, for distribution amongst the members, 
and to enlist their interest in the collection of specimens of this family in 
various parts of Britain ; specimens of which he will be glad to receive or 
name for collectors. The thanks of the Society were given to Mr. Bennett 
for his presentation. Mr. J. R. Byrom, of Droylsden, exhibited a number 
of lichens which he had collected last summer in the Dovrefeld, Norway, 
and made some remarks thereon. The specimens were very fine examples, 
and mounted unpressed, and in the form of their growing condition. Mr. 
W. H. Pearson exhibited a large number of French hepatics which he had 
received from our French corresponding member, Mons. R. du Buysson ; 
he also brought before the notice of the society Professor Lindberg's latest 
monograph on two new genera of hepatics. Mr. Cash read some chapters 
from the compiled letters and correspondence of Edward Hobson, in 
continuation of the completed series in hand. — Thos. Rogers, Hon. Sec. 



te 



DARWINISM AND BEAUTY. 



By Henry Cappee,. 

Eead before the Lancashire^ and Cheshire Entomological Society, Oct. 2^9, 18-^. 

It is strange and interesting to observe how a great discovery in any 
department of thought will make its influence felt in other and 
apparently dissimilar departments ; and perhaps no better illustration 
of this tendency could be advanced than the great discovery of our 
age — the theory of Evolution. Originally framed to explain facts of 
natural history, its influence has been felt not only in religious and 
philosophical thought, but in material science, notably in chemistry. 
I allude to the hypothesis which, though its truth is so difiicult to 
demonstrate, seems so likely to be true if we may judge, from analogy, 
that the so-called elements may not be elements after all, but, like 
ammonium, merely compound radicals, there being in reality not more 
than two or three true elements. But this is a digression. 

Whilst in no way under-rating the immense importance of Darwin's 
discovery, is it not interesting to speculate upon how far its influence 
in thought may be limited, say one hundred years hence ? We 
are at present, as it were, dazzled by its virgin brilliancy, and 
wherever we turn our eyes all things seem coloured by it. Bye-and- 
bye, when the first glare has passed away, we shall probably see that, 
after all. we have sometimes been deceived. Meanwhile it may be 
profitable to occasionally rub our eyes a little to try and see more 
clearly, for though the theory of evolution is the truth, and possibly 
nothing but the truth, even its great discoverer would never have 
claimed it as the whole truth. I purpose, in the following paper, first 
to notice what Darwin has to say on the subject of beauty, and after- 
wards to bring forward a few independent considerations. 

Anyone who has read Darwin's works will doubtless remember the 
charming chapter in the Descent of Man," devoted to the consider- 
ation of the origin of beauty in the butterfly. As this subject is 
likely to be especially interesting to this Society, and as it contains 
the key to all Darwin has to say upon the subject of beauty, I shall 
endeavour to give a brief summary of his argument. In a former 
chapter he has proved that the sense of beauty is not peculiar to man, 
but that he has it in common with the lower animals. This is shown 
to be the case when the males display their charms of colour or of 
voice before the females during courtship. He also gives a number of 
N.S., Vol. ix. June, 1884. 



182 



The Naturalist. 



instances of animals exhibiting a sense of pleasure in certain sounds 
and colours. It would be superfluous to go into details here, as 
doubtless you all know how completely Darwin has proved his case ; 
but it is essential to the due appreciation of the whole of the following 
argument that this should be remembered. 

I cannot open the discussion better than in Darwin's own words. 
They are as follows: — "Every one must have admired the extreme 
beauty of many butterflies and of some moths ; and it may be asked, 
are their colours and diversified patterns the result of the direct action 
of the physical conditions to which these insects have been exposed, 
without any benefit being thus derived 1 Or have successive variations 
been accumulated and determined as a protection, or for some unknown 
purpose, or that one sex mav be attractive to the other ^ And again, 
what is the meaning of the colours being widely different in the males 
and females of certain species, and alike in the two sexes of other 
species, of the same genus?" 

Darwin next mentions, on the authority of Mr. Bates, that in the 
South American genus Epicalia there are twelve species the sexes of 
which haunt the same stations, of which nine species have males which 
rank amongst the most brilliant of all butterflies, and are so different 
from the comparatively plain females that they were formerly ranked 
in different genera. The females of these nine species resemble one 
another, and also resemble those of allied genera found in various parts 
of the world. He argues from this that the nine species are descended 
from an ancestral form coloured in nearly the same manner, and that 
the males alone have been changed ; by sexual selection. In the tenth 
species the male resembles the female, thus strengthening this view. 
In the two remaining species both males and females are beautifully 
coloured, though the female in a somewhat less degree. Thus, out of 
twelve species nine have females which resemble one another and the 
females of allied genera much more closely than they resemble the 
males of their own species, in one male and female are about alike, 
and in the remaining two species both male and female are highly 
coloured. These facts clearly point to the conclusion that it is the 
males that have bec(»me altered by selection (in this case sexual), and 
that in the two exceptional species the females have become modified 
through inheritance from the males. 

But this is no isolated instance. Darwin gives a number of others, 
which I need not here repeat, and concludes his examples by 
remarking that even amongst our English butterflies we have a good 
case in ]>oiiit. In Lycania cicjcdh^'' he says^ " both sexes have a 



Capper : Darwinism and Beauty. 



188 



brown colour, bordered with small ocellated orange sp ^ts, and are thus 
alike. In L. Mgon the wings of the male are of a fine blue, bordered 
with black, whilst those of the female are brown, with a similar border 
closely resembling the wings of Z. agestis. Lastly, in L. Ariov both 
sexes are of a blue colour and are very like, though in the female the 
edges of the wing are somewhat duskier, with the black spots plainer ; 
and in a bright blue Indian species both sexes are much more alike." 

The only explanation of these facts he considers to be the action of 
sexual selection. Natural selection would necessarily affect both sexes 
alike, and therefore some other agency must have been at work. Darwin 
shows that even female butterflies are particular with regard to their 
mates, and argues that therefore the more beautiful males being chosen 
by the stronger, and consequently more prolific, females, would, on an 
average, leave a larger number of progeny to inherit their beauty than 
the less brightly coloured, which would have to pair with older, and 
consequently weaker females, or not at all. As we have seen in the 
majority of cases, this beauty seems to have been inherited by the 
males alone, but in some instances the females have been affected in a 
secondary manner. 

All who have read what Darwin has to say on this subject will, I 
think, agree that his conclusions are sound. The same law has been 
at work amongst birds and many animals, indeed it seems to have 
acted powerfully upon man himself, with this important distinction — 
that both sexes have been affected, whereas in the case of animals, as 
a rule the males alone are modified, for amongst them the females are 
the only choosers. 

It is scarcely necessary, except for the sake of completeness, to 
mention Darwin's explanation of the development of the gay and 
striking colours of most flowers, for it is now so universally known 
and understood — namely, that they serve to attract insects for purposes 
of fertilization. When Darwin discusses beauty, it is usually in 
connection with one of the above-mentioned ideas. 

He is an opponent of the theory, which probably few now hold, that 
beauty has been created solely for man's enjoyment, and in one place 
he discusses in a most interesting manner the strange variations in the 
idea of beauty exhibited by different races of mankind. These subjects, 
which I intend presently to consider further, lead us up to our second 
division. 

We have seen that Mr. Darwin's researches greatly increase our 
knowledge of the manner in which beauty has been developed in 
animate nature. We have next to consider the vast amount of beauty 



184 



The iN'aturalist. 



that exists entirely beyond the scope of his theories, and to enquire 
the meaning of its presence. 

It is remarkable how man finds everywhere where his hand has not 
marred Nature's fair work, numberless objects which appeal to his 
sense of beauty infinitely more completely than the greatest triumphs 
of human art ; and even when his ruthless hand has for a while 
destroyed this beauty, if he leaves her undisturbed to work, with 
invisible fingers she will restore it again. Everywhere around us it is 
found. Beneath our feet is spread a gay carpet of green, above we are 
encircled with a firmament filled with ever- changing glows. Now it 
glows a brilliant mass of richest blue, and again it is filled with 
fantastic clouds ; they grow darker and darker, and as night closes 
upon us the lightning plays amidst their frowning forms, and yet again 
the clouds are gone, the sound of the trumpet is hushed, and we stand 
beneath the sparkling splendour of the stars. Alike where meadow on 
meadow stretches out as far as the eye reaches, decked with fair trees, 
and filled with dancing corn, and where amidst barren mountains and 
grim peaks, that seem the thunder's home, the cataract holds carnival, 
there is something that fills man's soul with inexpressible delight. 
Thus we see that even the part of nature that is independent of any 
theory of selection teems with beauty, and it is found in many 
instances amongst living organisms under circumstances which entirely 
exclude any such theory as an explanation. The rich colour of the 
blood, as Darwin himself points out, is a good exemplary case ; and 
though the bright colours of flowers seem to have been developed by 
sexual selection, the lovely green of chlorophyll, the splendid tints of 
the dying leaves in autumn (another of Darwin's own instances), and 
the graceful forms of trees and other plants, cannot have been thus 
developed. What, then, is the meaning of the existence of all this 
beauty ] Why should we admire Nature's works more than the 
products of our own art, and indeed esteem him the greatest artist 
who best interprets her 1 Much of his own work man admits to be 
positively repulsive to his own aesthetic taste. He has to search far 
and wide to find such an object in nature. As a rule, when natural 
objects are repulsive they are so from unpleasant associations, and not 
from any inherent ugliness. I am of course always assuming that they 
are viewed in their ordinary place in nature. The caged lion's roar is 
deafening and profoundly unpleasant ; in its native wilds it is said to 
be imposing in the extreme. 

Our natural repugnance to rats, beetles, and spiders probably arises 
from their frequent intrusion in our habitations and amongst our food 



Capper : Darwinism and Beauty, 



185 



To illustrate how liable we are to err on such a point, I may mention 
the case of a lady, who declared that she could not bear to see beetles 
of any kind ; and when I protested that many beetles are beautifully 
decorated, she said she detested their very form. She nevertheless 
wore as a brooch an imitation of a red beetle, but a poor reproduction 
of the original type. This repulsion to beetles in this case was 
obviously due to association. At the same time it would be rash to 
assert that no truly ugly natural object exists. Darwin mentions 
certain sea snakes as being such, but the very fact that he has to go so 
far for an instance proves how difficult it is to find one. Nor is it 
necessary for my argument that its non-existence should be assumed. 

It is important to remember that pleasures derived from beauty are 
entirely different in character from those derived from any sensual 
source. If they be, as the pure materialists would tell us, simply and 
solely due to certain unknown movements of the molecules of the 
brain, where is the distinction from sensual pleasure which they 
would tell us was due to other similar movements Can one set of 
molecular movements be higher or more refined than another^ In 
our jjresent state of knowledge it is impossible to state whether such 
movements do or do not occur, but this cannot be proves I to be the 
case ; and even were it proved, there remains something beyond 
which materialism cannot explain. The question as to whether the 
sense of beauty, and other similar ideas, are or are not self-existent 
in the human mind, is one far too wide for discussion here. There 
are great authorities on both sides of the question, and it is beset 
with many difficulties. You will remember that Professor Cayley, in 
that minute portion of his address before the British Association 
which was intelligible to ordinary mortals, gave his support to the 
theory of self-existence, and this after a full consideration of what 
Mill says in favour of the other view. You will doubtless by this 
time have perceived that I have assumed that his view is correct. 
Those who do not agree with me may be unable to agree with my 
conclusion, but the present is not the time to discuss the matter with 
them. When we consider that throughout nature we so universally 
find that which appeals to our sense of beauty, we are led to one of 
two conclusions — either beauty has been created for the purpose of 
gratifying this sense, or it is itself the product of an intellect having 
a similar sense of beauty. The former theory, once so universally 
accepted, is not supported bv known facts. 

Full many a gem, of purest ray serene, 

The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear ; 

Full many a flower is born to blush unseen, 
And waste its sweetness on the desert air." 



186 



The Naturalist. 



And we all know that numberless objects exist, and have existed and 
perished, that never met or shall meet the eye of man. Consideration 
will, I think, produce the conviction that such a theorj is most 
improbable. We are thus led to the conclusion that beauty is the 
result of intellect. We will next consider how this theory is 
strengthened by further considerations. 

To return to our late subject, the development of beauty in Lepi- 
doptera. Darwin shows that in this order brilliancy of colour not 
only occurs in the perfect insect, but frequently in the caterpillar. 
Sexual selection is of course here entirely out of the question. His 
explanation is that those caterpillars which exhibit these brilliant 
colours have a nauseous taste, and birds do not care to consume 
them. Their colour serves to distinguish them from other cater- 
pillars which are more palatable to the birds, and thus acts as a 
protection. Now, both in the cnse of the butterfly and the caterpillar 
the colours are not only bright, but of a most refined character, and 
there are also shadings, lines, rings, S:g., most tastefully arranged ; 
and since it is scarcely credible that the female butterfly can 
appreciate such niceties, and since the caterpillars would be as well 
protected by any colour, however gross and glaring, whilst lines, 
circles, &c., seem to be absolutely useless to it, we must conclude that 
though the theory of selection explains much, it does not in this case 
cover all the fncts. But indeed the theory necessarily implies that 
there is a constant tendency in the species affected to produce the 
bright colours, and that natural or sexual selection, as the case may 
be, merely takes advantage of this tendency. Here we see both these 
agencies at work, and in each case the delicate shadings and markings 
and refinement of colour appear. These markings are also found in 
some chrysalises. 

Here, I think, we derive strong support for our views. 

It is also well supported by analogy, for. the arguments I have 
been using can be equally applied to such principles as order, unity 
in diversity, &c., which can be appreciated and admired by the human 
intellect, but which have been placed in nature by another agency. 

Objection may be taken on the ground that man's sense of beauty 
is variable. As shown by Darwin, it varies widely in different 
individuals and different races, but as this variation can only take 
place within certain limits, I do not think the objection very important. 
No sane person would declare the star-lit sky to be repulsive, or lind 
beauty say in an ordinary locomotive waggon. 

The fact that our sesthetic taste is not fixed may account for the 



Chappell: Reminiscences of Burnt Wood. 



187 



existence of such objects as the sea-snakes mentioned by Darwin as 
being ugly products of nature. We may also argue from this fact 
that not only is beauty in nature produced by an intellect similar to 
that of man, but by one having an almost identical taste. 

To sum up. I have shown that Darwin has explained in a most 
interesting manner the development of beauty in many animals by the 
theory of sexual selection, but that although this theory throws much 
light on the subject, it also leaves much unexplained. It does not 
tell us why the colours and markings produced should be of a most 
refined type, or give a -y reason why beauty should exist throughout 
nature. We have therefore to look for some other cause, and since 
the intellect of man is capable of appreciating, and to a limited extent 
of reproducing this beauty, and since it is highly improbable that it 
has been created solely for his gratification, — we are irresistibly led 
to the conclusion that it is the product of an intellect alike in kind 
but immeasurably grander than his own. 

Lest anyone should think me indifferent to the higher conceptions 
of the Creator given us by religion, I may say that I have purposely 
avoided saying anything on so sacred a subject, which belongs to 
another sphere of thought, and about which any remarks here would 
be out of place. 

Huyton Park, 

Liverpool. 



REMINISCENCES OF BURNT WOOD, STAFFORDSHIRE. 

By Joseph Chappell. 

Read before the Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society, February 
25th, 1884. 

About 1850 I w^as informed that there were extensive woods at or 
near Ashley, which have since become known as Burnt Wood. At that 
time I knew very little about entomology, although I ventured to 
explore them. My time being very limited, and Whitsuntide being 
the only period that I have a week to spare, I packed up my collecting 
apparatus and started en route for Burnt Wood, about fifty miles — a 
pleasant walk at that time. I arrived at Ashley late in the evening, in 
consequence of loitering to admire the scenery, and to devote a little 
time to entomology. Early next morning I entered Burnt Wood, 
where Thecla rubt was skipping about the banks very abundantly ; 
Argynnis Selene and Eiiphrosyne were sailing about the open glades ; 



188 



The Naturalist. 



GonepUryx rhamni seemed to be flying against time over bush and 
briar ; Evhyra pendularia was at rest on the oaks ; Oryyia pudibufnia 
was common on the low bushes, especially on Vaccinimyt> myrtillus ; 
Lycodm argiolus was flying round the holly ; Z. Alexis and ArdhocJiaris 
cardaw/ines were plentiful near ''Four Oaks" — even these were game 
to me. Bombyx rubi was flying in profusion ; of Macaria iiolata I 
found one at rest on a j^oung oak (this was a rare species, and my 
capture of it probably induced Mr. John Blakeley to visit Burnt Wood 
the following season). The males of Lampyris noctiluca visited sugar, 
also Helups carahoides abundantly \ Silpha thoracica was abundant on 
carrion ; 6\ quadripnnctata occurred freely on the branches of trees ; 
Corymbites cupreus and C. pectinicoruis flew very abundantly over the 
meadow-grass just outside the wood. I returned home after being 
there a week, perfectly satisfied with my visit. 

The following Whit-week Mr. John Blakeley and I went to 
Burnt W^ood, and during the week we added a few more species to my 
previous list ; among them were the following : — Lit/wda ^nesomella y 
L, rubricollis^ Flatypteryx lacertula^ I\ falcala, Scotosia undulata^ and 
Macaria notata freely ; Campy lus linearis also occurred freely, and we 
obtained some nice varieties ; Sericosomus brunneus occurred sparingly 
on birch, and Cryptocephalas lineola on low sallow bushes. We had just 
found the larvae of Cleora glabraria feeding on a long thread-like lichen 
growing on oak trees in Bishop's Wood, when the keeper turned us 
out of the Wood for not asking his permission instead of the wood- 
ranger's ; this discouraged me from visiting the place for many years, 
and my success in other localities made me almost forget Burnt Wood. 

In the course of a year or two we had formed a society at Manches- 
ter for sending its members to explore districts we were unable to visit 
individually, and about the middle or latter end of June, we sent Mr. 
Worthington, to Burnt Wood, where he was fortunate in capturing some 
very good species, viz : — Melitcea Aihalia^ Argynnis PapJiia, A, Adippe^ 
Notodonta chaonia^ Ellopia fasciaria^ Eupithecia debiliata, Atigerona 
prufiaria^ Hyperia crassalis, and Cleora glabraria. The latter species was 
obtained, I believe, by beating the branches of oak, the perfect insect 
falling and simulating death ; it occurred at the " Slather hills,'* in 
Burnt Wood. Many other species were obtained, and consequently 
other entomolugists visited the district. 

Some years after Mr. John Smith was sent to Burnt Wood, and 
was fortunate in capturing a specimen of Notodonta bicolora, a species 
with which he was previously unacquainted. I believe it was killed 
by tobacco-smoke, which had the effect of changing its colour. He 



Chappell : Eeminiscences of BtrRNT Wood. 



189 



drew the attention of some of the keepers to his capture, probably in 
consequence of its being a very remarkable insect, and this s[)ecimen 
was eventually obtained by Mr. Carter, by purchase. About the same 
time, a specimen of Sesla Hplmjifornm was captured by Mr. Vincent 
Moss, one of the under game-keepers who collected insects ; others I 
believe, were obtained from the wood-cutters in the larval and pupal 
states, some of which were reared by Mr. Moss. 

In 1865 I decided to visit Burnt Wood once more in company with 
Mr. T. Charlton and Mr. Samuel Greenhough, during Whit-week. So 
much had Burnt Wood altered that I scarcely knew my way about. 
However, I captured a few good beetles, and one Sotodoulo chaouia by 
Tuesday night, when Mr. Greenhough decided to return home. I 
collected as>iduously (^coleoptera principally), until Friday, when I was 
rewarded by a specimen of Nutodontn hlcolora, which I knocked out of 
a birch bush into my umbrella while beating for beetles. The 
announcement rendered Mr. Charlton speechless However, I told 
him to sit down and we would decide on other tactics. After I had 
put my specimen safely away and packed up my umbrella, we each 
cut a beating stick nine or ten feet long, and fell to work in earnest, 
and in a very short time Mr. Charlton shouted out " Hurrah !" He had 
beaten a pair {'m copula) out of a birch bush. Several hours more 
were spent in beating and sea ching beneath birch, without finding 
any more. I shall never forget the pleasure it gave me to see 
hicolora alive, especially beautiful with the almost confluent orange 
marking, when the wings are folded together. They remind me of 
MninuiHtn when on the wing. Later on in the evening, about four or 
five o'clock, I captured one on the wing; before dusk, Mr Charlton 
took another ; I then again had the pleasure of adding another. The 
next day w^as entirely devoted to searching for Oicolura^ without 
success. We decided to keep the females alive for the purpose of 
obtaining ova ; they were placed in a perforated zinc box lined with 
newspaper, the one we obtained in copula loose, and the others pinned, 
and they were all in my care. On Sunday we set out for home, 
having been there a week. 

Before we left on Sunday morning, the under keeper Edwin Moss, 
and his brother Vincent paid, us a visit, when the following conversa- 
tion took place : 

" Well Vin, bow many SpJiegi/orme have you taken this season 1 " 
None ; why ] " 

Oh ! I only asked you the question." 
" Why % have you taken it ? " 



190 



The Naturalist. 



" No, I suppose there's a knack in it," 

That's all." 
" I shall get into it." 

I dare say you will." 

I have taken hlnolora, only six ; you know there's only a bit of at 
knack in it. You had better see them." 
Which they did ; the insects at that time being all alive. 

After we arrived home I transferred the unpinned female to a paper 
ba ' in which I had previously placed a few birch leaves, and I 
obtained 1U6 ova (not 186, as stated in the Ent. Mo. Mag.) the 
following week. 

The ova are green and hemispherical, changing to almost chocolate 
in the centre, previous to the emergence of the larvse. I fed the larvae 
on birch ; 22 changed to pupae, and seven perfect insects emerged the 
ensuing season 15 pupae were alive until 1867, but never emerged. 
The larva is green, whitish on the back, with several yellow lines, the 
spiracular line being interrupted. My friend Mr. Sidebotham saw 
the larvse several times and the late Mr. Doubleday was aware that I 
was feeding them. The pupae were enclosed in cocoons among the fallen 
leaves, close to the surface of the peat in my breeding-cage. 

The first specimen I captured is in the collection of Mr. Barrett ; one 
was in the collection of the late Mr. Doubleday ; two are in my own 
collection ; two in that of Mr. Sidebotham ; one in that of the Rev. 
Henry Burney; one was in the collection of Mr. O. Hammond, near 
St. Alban's ; the late Mr. Campbell, of Manchester, purchased four 
from Mr. Charlton and sold them to Mr. Harwood, of Colchester ; and 
one, or rather a portion of one— for it had lost the abdomen — was sold 
to Mr King, along wit Mr. Charlton's collection. 

Manchester, February, 1884. 



NATURAL HISTORY NOTES FROM SOUTH AFRICA. 

( Concluded. ) 

By S. D. Bairstow, F.L.S. 

A DIRTY bluish pink species of Turr 'ddla^ w^hose name I do not know, 
is often taken alive amongst the rocks. The great object of its life 
consists in making a shell of irregular dimensions and shape. A perfect 
proportionate specimen is the rarity — an ugly one the species. Ancillaria 
obesa^ Ceriihium pingiiis, and similar types of small fry go to form the 
grand marine graveyard of our coast, but as with most of the lesser 
mollusca, although their shells are procured in tolerably fair condition 
we do not find their living inmates. Members of the periwinkle group 



Bairstow : Natural History Notes from South Africa. 191 

struggle meritoriously to replace them, but these are usually neglected 
by otherwise disappointed collectors. I have taken scores of smashed 
Malapium Imeatum (a lovely shell, when good) but only two really 
acceptable specimens. I have gathered one hundred Mitra picta, over 
fifty Bulla aperta, over two hundred of either Desmolea, but out of the 
whole collection to select a series for my cabinet is not a gratifying task. 
Judging from a congeries or mass of particles where bits of strange 
shells are certain to congregate, I might safely infer that undercurrents 
and heavy seas have imported us treasures from distant parts, or else 
the marine fauna of South Eastern Africa is rich in unrecorded species 
of inaccessible location. A fortnight ago I picked up a fine but small 
Dentalum (?) I don't think it is recorded from the Cape. I am no 
adept in the arrangement of mollusca according to the laws of generic 
or specific areas, in the art of provincialisation — if I may so coin the 
word — but if not a genuine native, from where has it travelled, this 
fragile delicate shell of an insignificant creature ? Did it descend from 
the Red Sea and preserve animation until within reach of our raging 
waters ? or as a friend suggests, " was it swallowed by a fish near the 
Indian coast, which took an excursion r/(,wn South ; got sick away from 
home after digesting the animal, and disgorged the shell as unpalatable 
in the Algoa Bay T In either event the journey must have been long 
and tedious. Perhaps you can assist me in the problem. 

I am now nearly at my journey's end : — first impressions, one of 
winding lanes and twisted alleys ; and many sighs have been gulped, 
many regrets uttered that I am not quite at home amongst the strange 
forms and faces, habits and languages, of my beloved chums. I started 
planless, I finish planless. Much I might have said, much I might 
have omitted. Touching mollusca, why did I omit mention of the 
great African Achatina ] or why not tell you about my prolific 
Leplsma writing desk friend, which always bids me welcome and then 
flees away in terror ] What have I to say about our noble Crustaceans, 
or most curious fishes 1 Reply there is none. Is there one class 
beseeching recognition more than another ] If so I give the palm to 
Crustacea, and deeply deplore my inability to treat upon them. I have, 
however, drawn a couple of marine examples for you, Decapoun (PL x.) 
to which surmise all details. The indefatigable Farquahar gathered 
them, and several of our Society members are now tackling the class in 
real earnest. This is a fitting place to state one of our little grievances. 
We are always pleased to give value for value, specimens (in duplicate) 
for information rendered, but when solitary ones are sent to be named, 
with accompanying request to return until duplicated j I submit the 



192 



The Naturalist. 



form should be adhered to. Those at your end willing to assist are 
guaranteed compensation, and we are glad to exchange on such a basis. 
I have said that at home generalists are deficient. Here we want 
specialists. Still, one is apt to generalise too much, guided by mis- 
leading ambition ; but as I topple over that rock fragment in the 
ocean, and see a living, moving mass, I long to know each creatu e by 
its name, to learn the economy of each, to acquire knowledge and hold 
it close. y to the end. Yearning, the real struggle for existence, turns 
the tap of life's rough watercourse, and " Rack, go back !" I am 
constrained, hemmed in, baffled, by the miserable peg w^hich plugs 
desire with its wretched checkmate, commerce. Incapacity to achieve 
my soul's delight. Abortive attempt to do something ; vulgar 
awj^kening— nothing done. Partial contentment must suffice : not all 
I would, but all I could. Need I grapple with another opposing 
force ? Each step I take on beach or veldt, novelty meets me half- 
way. What is your name ? I ask. 

Find it ! 

How] 

Read ! 

Where ? 

The question terminates discussion. Or put it in this fashion : 
Are you known or unknown 1 
Fin 1 out I 
How? 

Write home ! 

Bless my heart, it takes two months for prompt correspondence to 
pass, and then — what then ? O chaotic sequence ! Why, my friend 
submits to a friend, and he cannot re-obtain from that friend, but will 

write again, which he does not ! Therefore we emigrtint 

naturalists act upon Government suggestions, and feed on hope. 
Precious few provisions our glorious Assembly offers to hungry indi- 
viduals. Give, and we'll accept to any extent. Request, leave your 
card, and call again when we are not at home. Real sympathy, 
practical assistance, emanates from members of the press. I cannot 
speak too highly of the Eastern Province public writers. Where 
magazines, social mediums, are absent ; where business u business, 
and men work on common ground ; where effort anticipates return, I 
repeat — " Honour the Press !" Is South Africa a century behind in 
art and science] Then the Press is blameless— supporters of the Press 
are not. Success to it, and may advertisements flourish, and be paid for 
in dup season. 



¦4 



Rainfall for-Mct". 



193 



I now wrap up my batcli of rigmarole disjointed letters, trusting 
they may prove slightly interesting to some of my dear old field- 
companions. Remember ! impressions are subservient to alterations, 
more especially when first-born creations. Carp ! cavil ! erase ! but 
turn over a few leaves to my inaugural project, the details of intention, 
and then excuse. I have written as though I were chatting in the 
days gone by, and to myself the gossip is pleasant. Indeed, to shut 
the window, to draw the curtain, and retire, is an effort, the only one 
I feel to be irksome, and 

Thus — I say with Gloster — 

Sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud : 
And after summer evermore succeeds 
Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold : 
So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet, — 
Sirs, what's o'clock ]" 

Port Elizabeth, 

South Africa, Sept., 1883. 



ilatnfall for gvpril 





Height 

of 
gau<;e 
above 

sea 
level. 


Rain- 
fall, 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Datis. 


Date of 
heaviest 


Amount 
of 

neaviest 
Full. 






1884. 


1883. 


Fall. 


HUDDEESFIELD (Daltoil) ... 

(J. W. Hobson) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
1-75 


19 


10-74 


*10-14 


4 


0-27 


Leeds ... (Alfred Denny) . . 


183 


1-82 


19 


9-24 


6-77 t 


27 


0-29 


HoRSFORTH ... (James Fox) 


350 


2-21 


22 


10-07 


9-36 t 


27 


0-40 


Halifax... (F. G. S. Rawson) 


365 


2-09 


20 


14-84 


16-24 


27 


0-37 


Barnsley ... (Dr Sadler)... 


350 


212 


18 


9.36 


8-48 


28 


0-47 


Ingbirch WORTH (Mr. Taylor) 


853 


1-85 


18 


14-30 


12-72 


28 


0-44 


Wentworth Castle (Mr. 

Fisher) 


520 


201 


18 


10-12 


10-51 


28 


0-32 


Goole (J. Harrison)... 


25 


1-12 


17 


7-52 


7-81 


7 


-20 


Hull (Derringham) (Wm. 

Lawton) 


10 


1.62 


21 


7-55 


5-78 § 


12 


•26 


SCARBORO' (A. Eowntree)... 


130 


1-83 


19 


8-73 


7-33 II 


27 


•38 


Thirsk (Baldersby) 


100 


1-91 


15 


10-29 




1 


0-61 


(W. Gregson) 






Mas HAM (Thos. Carter j ... 


269 


2-08 


25 


12-64 




1 


0..54 


Shadwell (Geo. Paul) 


.500 


2-49 


21 






27 





* Average to date for 18 years, 1866-83. 
t Average of 30 years, 1853-62, & 1865-84. Average of 15 years, 1870-84. 
§ Average of 34 years, 1850-83. ii Average fall for April (18 years). 



Natterer's Bat at Pateley Bridge. — I have just received a living 
specimen of this bat from my correspondent, Mr. William Storey, of 
Pateley Bridge, who took it in that town on the evening of the 18th 
May. It is thus interesting to confirm its existence in that district, from 
which he sent it to me in June of last year, and one would think that it 
likewise occurs in other localities in the north of England, as bats are 
generally much overlooked. Its nearest allies are the whiskered and 
Daubenton's bats, from both of which it may be most readily distinguished 
by the smaller number of transverse lines which are to be counted in the 
interfemoral (or tail) membrane when held up to the light. There are 
only eight, whereas in the other two they number sixteen or m.ore. I 
should be glad to hear of its occurrence in other places. — Wm. Denison" 
Roebuck, Leeds, May 19th, 1884. 

Birds near Halifax. — The swallow arrived here (Ryburne Valley) 
on April 13th, the same date as last year ; the martin and sand-martin 
not appearing before April 29th, a later date than usual for this species ; 
Ray's wagtail was here on April 26th, and the sand-piper and cuckoo on 
May 1st, the latter, a few days later than generally. Owing to the mild 
weather, birds commenced to nest earlier than usual, and young thrushes, 
blackbirds, and robins were on the wing at the end of April. Resident 
and migratory birds are all very plentiful this spring in this district, and 
young birds will be numerous. — F. G. S. Rawson, May 9th, 1884. 

Eggs of Pied Wagtail. — At the meeting of our society, on the 17th, 
at Hessle, one of the party found a pied wagtail's nest with thirteen eggs. 
Is this not an extraordinary number, even if the nest were tenanted by 
two hens 1 One bird was on the nest, and I saw the eggs ; of their 
identity there can therefore be no mistake. — N. F. Dobr6e, president of 
the Hull Field Naturalists' Society. 

Large Halibut. — I saw to-day, on a fish-monger's slab in Hull, a 
halibut taken by a fishing smack off the Dogger, w^hich I measured to be 
6 feet 9 inches long, and weighing rather over 20 stones. This fish is 
abundant in our market, but rarely reaches anything like this size, 
though it is said to be common in more northern seas. — N. F. Dobree, 
Hull, 2Ist May, 1884. 

The Holly Blue Butterfly in Nidderdale. — I wish to record a fresh 
Yorkshire locality for Lyccena Argiolus, Mr. Wm. Storey having sent it to 
me from Guyscliffe, near Pateley Bridge, where he took it (a female 
specimen) on the 17th May. — Wm. Denison Roebuck, Leeds, May 19th, 
1884. 

OBITUARY. 

Edwin Birchall. — By the death of Edwin Birchall, Yorkshire loses 
another who, in his day, proved himseK to be one of its ablest and most 
gifted lepidopterists — a man of European repute as a student of that 
order, and one whose philosophical tendencies raised him so much above 



Notes and Queries. 



195 



the level to which many of our entomologists attain. He identified him- 
self very closely with the lepidopterous fauna of Ireland, for which he 
did a great deal, as the lists which he published in the 3rd and 10th 
volumes of the Entomologists' Monthly Magazine " amply shew. 
Whilst in Ireland too, he took and had captured for him, immense 
numbers of the local Zygcena nuhigena, which he distributed most freely 
and generously among the cabinets throughout Britain. The genus 
DianthoQcia was also a great favourite with him, and he paid much 
attention to it. He was a native of Leeds, but left the town at an early 
a^e, and returned to it only after many years, when his reputation had 
been made, and his fame won in other districts, so that he never had the 
opportunity of doing much for the lepidopterous fauna of his native 
county. At this time. Bishop's Wood and Sherwood Forest were frequen- 
ted by him in his collecting expeditions, and he was still a hard worker, 
and a capital correspondent, as we know from personal experience. The 
last few years of his life were spent in the Isle of Man, and here he 
was successful in obtaining its famous species, such as Sesia plilanthifor- 
mis, Diantlmcia coesia, Polia nigrocincta, &c. Latterly, he fell into bad 
health, but even when unable to collect himself, he employed the light- 
house keeper to send him such species as flew to and were captured at the 
lights ; and a number of these captures he kindly presented to us when 
we called upon him last year. For some time he was a Fellow of the 
Linnean Society, having been elected on the 18th of June, 1874. He 
died at Douglas on the 2nd of May, this year, aged 65 years. 



^B|3orls of Sndetus. 

Barnslby Naturalists' Society. — Meeting May 13th, Mr. T. Lister 
in the chair. — A full report of the spring migrants was read. The wheat- 
ear and willow warbler both reported March 22nd, chiffchaff 24th, a 
second instance April 2nd, sand martin 4th, pair of swallows 7th, 8th, 
and 9th, the latter did not come again for several days to their breeding 
haunts. Willow warbler noted (2nd instance) 9th, another 10th, house 
martin 11th and 14th, whitethroat 11th, redstart 13th, cuckoo seen on 
13th, had been reported singing on the 3rd ; yellow or Ray's wagtail and 
tree pipit 18th, grasshopper warbler 21st, sedge warbler 24th, whinchat 
25th, spotted flycatcher 27th, blackcap warbler 30th, wood warbler May 
1st, night-jar 3rd, nightingale 5th, swift 4th, landrail 7th, garden warbler 
and lesser whitethroat 9th. With the exceptional cases in March and 
early April, the migrants have come pretty near the average time. A few 
rarer residents and visitors have been noted — white sparrows near the 
Oaks Colliery and L. and Y. Station, Barnsley ; gold-crested wrens in 
Locke Park and other places April 5th ; green and great spotted wood- 
peckers, Nottan Park, on the 5th ; kestrel, Dodworth-road, 18th, at 
Silkstone 22nd ; nuthatch and spotted woodpecker, Deffer Wood ; black- 
headed gulls and flights af common gulls and wild geese, May 1st to 7th ; 
sparrow hawks seen. — T. L. 



19G 



The Naturalist. 



Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting, April 22nd, 1884, Mr. 
Soppitt, chairman. — Mr. Soppitt described a visit to Ingleton, where he 
found Pupa secale ; it has only been previously recorded from Kilnsey 
Crag. He noted having seen Viola hirta, wood sanicle, Draha vevna, &c., 
and on Ingleborough he found the purple saxifrage growing abundantly. 
He also reported a ramble up Goit Stock valley, where he saw the willow 
wren, swallow, sand martin, and also observed a pair of kingfishers making 
their nest. Mr. Carter showed a box of insects found on and about Ingle- 
borough, among which were Carahus arvensis, Nebria Gyle7ihallii, Calaihus 
melanocephalus, &c. ; Mr. West, specimens of HelUeborus viride, Htitchin- 
sea petrea, &c. , collected in a ramble near Matlock. 

Meeting, May 6th, Mr. Soppitt presiding. — Mr. Bennett exhibited two 
starlings from Skegness, also specimens of shells, Limnoea peregra, L. pal- 
ustris and Planorbis complanatus. Mr. Soppitt described a visit to Goit 
Stock, where he saw swallows, a pair of redstarts, and nest of the grey wag- 
tail with three young ones ; on returning, he saw a squirrel in Bingley 
Wood. Mr. Firth reported having seen a large number of yellow wag- 
tails about Brownroyd. Mr. Barraclough reported a number of plants he 
had observed about the roads near Tliornt<Hi, and in the neighbourhood 
of Cottingley. Mr. Soppitt exhibited a fungus found on the Scotch fir 
{Peridermium pini), the first stage of which is on the groundsel. Mr. 
Carter showed specimens of M. Artem>is (greasy fritillary). Mr. Ward 
reported a ramble from Ilkley to Harewood Castle, where he observed 
redstarts, missel thrush, and nests of hedge-sparrow and blackbird. 
Mr. Carter read a paper on ^' Coleoptera." 

Meeting, May 20th, Mr. J. W. Carter in the chair.— Mr. Illingworth 
described a visit to Roche Abbey with the Y.N.U. ; he also described a 
visit to Skegness. Mr. Soppitt exhibited Pans quadrifolia and Geranium 
hicidum, from Barden, and also a specimen of a fungus, Morchella 
esculenta ; he also reported a ramble of the society on the 17th, from 
Saltaire to Bingley, which was considered one of the best the society has 
had. Mr, Firth reported having observed in that ramble, 36 species of 
birds, among the summer visitors the black-cap and garden warblers ; he 
also noticed the dipper and snipe on Baildon Moor on the 18th. Mr. Terry 
exhibited a box of insects, among which was tS. dubitata, taken near the 
Parish Church. Mr. Eastwood read a paper on Nest-building Fishes." 

Heckmondwike Naturalists' Society. — Meeting, May 17th, 1884. Dr. 
Stuart (the president) in the chair. --Mr. J. M. Barber gave an account of 
a ramble which he had taken during that afternoon with the Juvenile 
Mutual Improvement Association of George-street Chapel to Owlet Hurst 
and Finching Dyke. The party collected about sixty botanical specimens 
and also observed several birds. Members present had noticed the 
cuckoo and corncrake during the week in the neighbourhood of Heck- 
mondwike. Mr. Barber had observed that the oak was fully a week 
before the ash at the present moment. The president then read his 



Reports of Socip:ties. 



197 



paper, on Air, Earth, and Water in Relation to Health "—the con- 
chiding paper of the series on The Humble Forms of Plant Life." 
After a vote of thanks had been passed, a ramble was arranged to the 
Carlinghow Banks and Howley Ruins for May the 31st. 

Lancashire and Cheshire Entomological Society. — Monthly 
meeting, April 28th, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) occupying the chair. 
— A paper was read entitled Entomological Notes from Grange and 
Witherslack," communicated by Mr. Shuttleworth, of Preston. In this 
were detailed the results of a day's collecting in 1881 , and a week s in 
1883, in this entomologically famous neighbourhood. During the conver- 
smione^ Rev. Thomas J. Moore, curator of the Museum, exhibited a nest 
of a species of mud-wasp, which he had found in the interior of a clock 
brought from the West Indies to be repaired, the nest having stopped the 
works. The secretary (Dr. Ellis) exhibited living specimens of the water 
spider from Liscard, and a living Cetonia amuia from Leeds, where it had 
been hibernating in thatch. 

Leeds Naturalists' Club and Scientific Association. — Meeting 
May 19th, Mr. W. Denison Roebuck, F.L.S., in the chair. — There was 
a good muster of members, and numerous objects were on view. On 
behalf of Mr. W. Storey, of Pateley, were exhibited freshly gathered 
specimens of the adder's tongue, moonwort, bush vetch, petty whin, and 
field speedwell. Mr. Charles Smethurst showed a specimen of the oxlip 
from Crake Hall, Bedale ; and larvae of the purple barred and lemon 
sallow moths, recently secured at Addingham, near Ilkley, Mr. Henry 
Marsh brought a series of ammonites collected at Whitby, and Mr. S. S. 
Peat specimens of quartz containing gold, lately received from a relative at 
Charters Towers, Queensland. There was further shown on behalf of Mr. 
Storey, Natterer's bat, and several slugs, moths, beetles, and bees, and a 
box of miscellaneous insects captured in Nidderdale more than 20 years ago 
by a Mr. Hutchinson . The more interesting of these were wasp beetle, 
ruby-tailed fly, tiger beetle, and cardinal beetle. Mr. F. Emsley exhibited 
the pollen sacs of the honey bee, and Mr. Walter C. Scott a perfectly blue 
egg of the blackbird, taken lately at Arthington. 

Manchester Cryptogamic Society. — At the usual monthly meeting 
in April, Dr. B. Carrington, F.R.S.E., in the chair, Mr. W. H. Pearson 
exhibited a series of mosses and hepatics which he and Dr. Carrington 
had collected during the Easter holidays in the Lake District. They had 
been very fortunate in finding many rarities ; amongst them may be 
mentioned the following : — Glyphomitrium Daviesii^ the first record for 
England ; Orthotrichnm ButchinsicE, Leptodon Smithii, and Eypnum 
demissnm. Amongst hepatics the chief prize was Lejeunia microscopica, 
the only previous record being in the south of Ireland ; Adelanthus 
decipiens, only previously been found in Ireland and Wales ; Lepidozia 
cwpressina, new to Cumberland ; Radula aqniUgia^ Eadrda voluta, new 
to England ; Plagiochila tridenticulata ; and other rare hepatics were also 



198 



The Naturalist. 



found, and specimens of the various species were distributed. Mr. W. 
Forster exhibited some interesting young plants of a variety of Scolopen- 
drium mdgare, which he had raised from the margins of the fronds of full 
grown plants not producing spores. Mr. J. Cash finished the reading of 
his interesting compilation of the letters and correspondence of Edward 
Hobson. An essay on the genus Amhlystegium, in French, was presented 
to the society by Mons. R. du Buysson, the author. Mr. G. A. Holt 
recorded the finding of Gymnostomnm temie and Weissia mncronata at 
Ashley, in Cheshire. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Roche Abbey, May 8th, 1884. — 
The opening of the excursion season of 1884 was a most unqualified 
success. The district chosen was the very productive and picturesque 
magnesian limestone district surrounding Maltby Commons and Roche 
Abbey, with the beautiful Cistercian ruin as a rendezvous. There was a 
very large attendance of members and associates, not only from the 
neighbouring towns but from places so far distant as York, Leeds, and 
Hull. The arrangements had been most efliciently made by the officers 
of the Rotberham Society, to whom the Union stand much indebted. 
The majority of the members drove in waggonettes from Rotherham to 
Maltby. The Sheffield Naturalists' Club had made independent driving 
arrangements, and joined the other parties at Bramley village. The 
Doncaster members also drove direct to the place of meeting. Arrived 
at Maltby, the members divided into two parties, one of them, under the 
charge of the Rev. R. M. Norman, vicar of Maltby, and Mr. F. W. 
Dickinson, the secretary of the Rotherham Society, and numbering about 
a score, driving to Martin Beck, a wild jungly tract of country beyond 
Tickhill. The other party, at the head of which were the Rev. W. T. 
Travis, of Roche Abbey Mill, and Mr. S. H. Bennett, of Rotherham, 
continued the drive a mile or two beyond Maltby, and then alighted for 
the investigation of Maltby woods. Both parties subsequently made for 
the Abbey, as did also a smaller one of three members which walked 
down the valley and through Wood Lee Common to Roche Abbey, and 
afterwards examined the valley of the Laughton stream. About 120 sat 
down to tea, after which all the meetings, sectional and general, were 
held in the open air, the true Union weather" which prevailed ren- 
dering this course of procedure an enjoyable one. At the general meeting 
the chair was occupied by a vice-president, the Rev. W. C. Hey, M.A., 
of York. The minutes of the Malham meeting having been taken as read, 
the roll was called, and twenty societies were found to be represented, 
viz : — Huddersfieid, Heckmondwike, Barnsley, Wakefield, Elland-cum- 
Greetland, Liversedge, Bradford (Naturalists'), Leeds (3), York (2), 
Sheffield, Dewsbury, Hull, Halifax, Doncaster, Ilkley, and Rotherham. 
Of individual members, associates, and friends there were about 140 
present during the day, including many of the more influential of the 
Sheffield and Rotherham societies. The Kingston Field Club, Hull (54 
members), was admitted into union, on the motion of Dr. J. A. Erskine- 



Reports of Societies. 



199 



Stuart, of StainclifFe, seconded by Mr. Thomas Lister, of Barnsley. 
On introducing the subject of new members, the chairman made an 
effective and telling speech, in which he pointed out that the Union made 
excursions into different parts of the county, not only for investigation 
and social enjoyment, but also to draw public attention to the work which 
it endeavours to do, and thereby enlist support. A gratifying result of 
this speech, and of the personal efforts of members present, was that the 
list of four new members which the secretaries had brought with them 
was increased on the spot to twenty. The following were elected : Rev. 
R. M- Norman, Vicar of Maltby, Rev. W. T. Travis of Roche Abbey, 
Dr. W. H. Crossley of Maltby, Dr W. J. Lancaster, president of 
Barnsley Nat. Society, Messrs. Thomas Carter of Masham, W. Hoffman 
Wood of Leeds, Edward Birks (president Sheffield Nat. Club), F. 
Brittain, F. H. Colley and J. W. Mclntyre of Sheffield, Isaac Walker 
(president Rotherham Nat. Society), F. W. Dickinson, S. H. Bennett, 
Thomas E. Denham, James Rhodes, Geo. Eskholme, J. P., and R. 
Marsh, jun., of Rotherham, and H. Somerset, M. H. Stiles, and J. M. 
Kirk of Doncaster. Thanks were then unanimously voted, on the 
motion of Mr. Councillor F. Brittain of Sheffield, seconded by Dr. 
Burman of Wath-on-Dearne, to the Earl of Scarborough for permission to 
visit his estates during the day, and to the Revs. Norman and Travis, 
and Messrs. Bennett and Dickinson, for acting as leaders of parties. 
The Sectional reports were then given. Mr. James Backhouse, jun., of 
York, secretary, reported on behalf of the Vertebrate Section. Very 
little was observed excepting birds, of which an unusual number were 
noted. The resident species seen numbered 36, of which may be 
mentioned jay, creeper, nuthatch, heron, coot, great-crested grebe, and 
little grebe (the two latter species nesting in Sandbeck Park). The 
summer visitants noted were as follows : Redstart, whinchat, wheatear, 
chiffchaff, willow wren (abundant), wood wren, whitethroat, lesser white- 
throat, blackcap, sedge warbler, grasshopper warbler, yellow wagtail, 
tree pipit, swallow, martin, sand martin, cuckoo, swift, and corncrake. 
The only reptile seen worthy of note was a viper about 3ft. in length. 
For Conchology the Rev. W. C. Hey, M.A., of York, president of the 
Section, reported that not very much had been done. No water-shells 
had been found at all, while of land mollusca 18 species, as follows, had 
been collected : — "^Helix aspersa, H. rotundata, "^H. lapicida, H. nemo- 
ralis, H. hispida, Zonites cellarius, Z. crystallinus, '^Z. purus, Z. niti- 
dulus, Clausilia rugosa. Pupa umbilicata, Cochlicopa lubrica, *Corychium 
minimum, Arion ater, A. hortensis, Limax agrestis, Bulimus obscurus, 
and "Vertigo edentuia. Those marked * were additional to the list 
already printed in the circular. The Entomological Report was given by 
Mr. G. T. Porritt, F.L.S., of Huddersfield, president of the Section, 
who recorded that very little had been done. Among lepidoptera 
Messrs. George Rose and W. E. Brady had taken larvae of Thecla W- 
album, and Xanthia gilvago (?), and Mr, W. Hewett of York had secured 



200 



Tfie Naturalist. 



Notodonta dodoniiea in the Eoche Abbey grounds. The coleoptera 
included Chrysomela polita (plentiful), Coccinella variabilis, C. 14- 
guttata, C. 11-punctata, Silpha rugosa and S. thoracica, Phyllobius 
argentatus, Timarcha coriaria, and Telephorus clypeatus. For Botany, 
Mr. P. F. Lee, Sec. Bot. Sect. , who was absent through illness, sends the 
following note, from data supplied by Dr. F. Arnold Lees and Mr. W. H. 
Stott (Doncaster), wl. o reported for the Section at the meeting, and also from 
specimens collected by the Martin Beck party : — Altogether 117 species 
of flowering plants were observed either in bloom or fruit, and of these 
the notable ones were Kanunculus Lenormandi, P. auricomus, Helleborus 
viridis, Yiola canina sub-sp. sylvatica, var. Reichenbachiana, Genista 
anglica (the needle furze), Rubus fruticosus sub-sp. sub-erectus, 
Crataegus oxyacanthoides, ThuilL, Chrysosplenium alternifolium, Vale- 
riana dioica, Myosotis sylvatica. Daphne laureola (the spurge laurel), 
Myrica gale (the bog myrtle), the daffodil, or Lent lily, Narcissus pseudo- 
narcissus, Paris quadrifolia (found with five and six, as well as four 
leaves), Convallaria majalis, Fritillaria meleagris, Colchicum autumnale, 
and Carex digitata. When my notes for the circular were sent (which 
were cut down, as the others, for want of space), I then said with 
reference to Primula elatior reported by a local collector, that perhaps on 
close examination it would prove to be one of the hybrids of the Lond. 
Cat., the true P. elatior of the South of England having acuminate calyx- 
teeth, and no folds at the mouth of the corolla, Mr. Lees says, after 
seeing the plant in question, that the Primula elatior (oxlipj gathered at 
Roche Abbey is not the true oxlip to which that name alone belongs, but 
is the cowslip-primrose hybrid — the Primula variabilis of Goupil, and the 
P. vulgaris var. C. intermedia of the Lond. Cat. The Fritillaria mele- 
agris is not accepted as anything but undoubtedly introduced in England 
north of Staffordshire and Warwick by the late H. C. Watson, the safest 
of all authorities on plant-distribution, in his ''Topographical Botany" 
and other works. The lily loohs native enough to uncritical observation, 
in the pasture land of Sand beck Park ; but against the probability of its 
indigenity are the facts that its locality is very near to the Hall parterres, 
and that it does not grow scattered all over the open ground like the 
other bulbous rooted liliaceous plant of the park — the Colchicum. The 
very circumscribed area over which it grows (and there thickly) must be 
taken into consideration too ; as well as the further fact that the kind of 
station in which it is found in Sandbeck Park is not like those in the 
Thames valley and elsewhere in the South, in which it occurs undoubtedly 
in an indigenous state. " Mr. Edward Birks, president of the Shefiield 
Naturalists' Club, made some observations on the flora of the district and 
the operations of the day. There was no report given for the Geological 
Section, as none of the sectional officers were present. The proceedings 
closed by a hearty vote of thanks to the chairman, proposed by the Rev. 
R. M. Norman, seconded by the Rev. W. T. Travis. — W. D. R. and 
W. E. C. 



''TO OUR READERS." 
^' Pour prendre conge.** 



It is now nine years since, at the request of the Yorkshire Naturalists' 
Union (then the West-Riding Consolidated Naturalists' Society), we 
undertook to edit and publish this Journal. It has appeared regularly 
ever since, indeed we believe we are correct in saying it has never been 
a day late, but has always been in our subscribers' hands by the first 
of the month during the whole of that period. Financially, it has 
always been satisfactory, there having been at the end of every year 
a small balance in hand. Of its utility we must leave others to 
judge. Many of the articles have been of great value ; the discovery 
of species new to the county or to Britain, in nearly all branches of 
Natural Science has been promptly recorded, and many have been 
described for the first time in this Journal. The Notes, &c., have 
kept the naturalists of this large county thoroughly informed as to 
what was being done by their brethren in the various branches of 
Natural Science ; and, consequently, cannot fail to have advanced 
the knowledge of the natural history of our county very materially. 

To all our contributors we offer our warmest thanks for the hearty 
co-operation they have always accorded to us. Personally we have 
made many friends among them, through our little Journal, and our 
labours in connection with it have always been so great a pleasure, 
that it is only other and urgent duties which have induced us to 
resign the position entrusted to us. Even this we did not carry out 
until we had secured the promises of Messrs. W. D. Roebuck and 
W. E. Clarke that they would, if appointed, undertake the editing 
in future ; but, knowing it is to be in the hands of such competent, 
enthusiastic, and conscientious naturalists, we have no hesitation or 
misgiving in handing it over to them, and we trust more support 
will be accorded to them even than has been to us. 

C. P. HOBKIRK. 
G. T. PORKITT. 

Vol. ix. July, 1884, 



^i)ngma( Articles. 



THE LATE MR. WILLIAM WILSON: 
NOTES ON HIS EARLY BRYOLOGICAL WORK. 

By J. Cash. 

(Read before the Manchester Cryptogamic Society.) 
Until Mr. Wilson, when quite young, became interested in the botany 
of his native county, the cryptogamia, both of Lancashire and Cheshire, 
had been (except by one or two humble botanists in the neighbourhood 
of Manchester) comparatively neglected. George Caley was one of the 
first to pay attention to the bryology of these parts, and, as the 
discoverer of at least one interesting species origiiially classed with the 
Weissicdy but now known under the familiar name of Discelium nudum, 
his name is not likely to be forgotten in bryological history. Con- 
temporary with him, and even more distinguished as a bryologist, was 
Edward Hobson, to whose Zeal and attainments testimony is borne by 
Sir William Jackson F^ooker in the pages of the Mascologia. Hobson 's 
career was almost ended when that of Wilson began. If the latter 
proved the more successful bryologist of the two, it was oAving, no 
doubt, to his superior educational advantages, and to his greater leisure 
for study both at home and in the field. 

Wilson had. from the first, an innate love of nature. Possessing a 
weakly constitution he was precluded from following the profession his 
parents had marked out for him, and as a means of recruiting his 
health much of his time, at suitable seasons, was spent out of doors. 
What more natural than that he should turn his attention to the 
flowers and mosses which grew in his path ] The study of these 5^ielded 
him mental occupation that was most acceptable and enjoyable, just as 
their collection afforded him the requisite inducement to take the 
exercise which was necessary for his physical strength. If Mr. Wilson 
had not botanised in his younger days he would never in all probability 
have reached the age of three score years and ten. 

It was about the year 1 81-^6 — possibly a little earlier — that Mr. 
Wilson began his bryological studies. I have seen a little portfolio of 
selected specimens, representing probably thirty species, gathered by 
him about that time in the vicinity of Over, in Cheshire. They were 
mostW common species. Amongst them was Aulacomnium androgynum^ 
a moss which may still be found growing luxuriantly, but always 
barren, on the sandy hedge banks about Over and Delamere. Another 
was Bartiumia pomi/ormis, which also is still to be found there. At first 
Mr. Wilson studied phsenogamous plants, and this study he continued 



Cash : The late Me. William Wilson. 



for some time with mucli success, but after his intimacy began with 
Sir W^m. Jackson Hooker he devoted closer attention to the Musci, 
which eventually, as we all know, became his specialty. In a former 
paper read to this society some particulars were given of Mr. Wilson's 
journeys to the Highlands, on the invitation of, and in company with, 
the distinguished Glasgow Professor. Their meetings in after life 
were not frequent, but the correspondence v^^hich passed between them 
covers a period of nearly fifty years, and a perusal of it throws much 
interesting light upon the history of many now familiar species. 

I propose in this communication to give some account of Mr. 
W^ilson's early explorations in his own immediate neighbourhood. I 
am indebted much for information to my late lamented friend, Dr. 
Kendrick, of Warrington, who obligingly placed in my hands a good 
deal of Mr. Wilson's botanical correspondence and private memoranda. 

For an enthusiastic bryologist some forty or fifty years ago, Lanca- 
shire and Cheshire were by no means barren ground. I have already 
mentioned one locality, viz.. Over, on the border of Delamere Forest, 
which Mr. W^ilson frequently visited. His family was interested in 
property there, hence his intimacy with the place. In February, 1828, 
on the road side between Over and Delamere he found upon the hedge 
bank a moss resembling Pottia iruncata, but presenting certain peculiar 
features which in his judgment removed it from that species. He 
named it provisionally Gymyiostomnm ofjine, MSS., and sent s^pecimens 
to Sir Wm. Hooker, along with Pottia truncata, var. /3, whicli grew 
associated with it. 8ir William replied in a letter dated Glasgow, 
April .3th, 1828, as follows: — 

The arrival of your letter and your parcel gave m.e very much 
pleasure, and not myself only but my boy Joseph,* who is highly 
gratified by the valuable proof you have given him of your recollection 
of him. * * You have given me, too, some interesting employment 
in the examination of your beautiful botanical specimens. I have 
devoted no little attention also to the Gymnoi^tonia^ and you will, I fear, 
think me very unreasonable in not being entirely of your opinion with 
regard to the two being distinct species. I see, indeed, all the 
characters you point out, and your sketch is entirely faithful. Amongst 
such minute objects as mosses and other cryptogamia, it is very difidcuit 
to say what constitutes a species and what a variety ; and, perhaps, 
had I seen only your G ymnoFAomum truncatulurn., var. /3, and your G. 
affine^ MSS., I should have agreed with you in thinking them distinct. 

* Now Sir J. D, Hooker, of Kew, for whom Mr. Wilson liact ^ent a present 
of mineraiogicai specimens. 



The Natuhalist. 



But I find in looking into my herbarium and to published specimens 
and figures such a gradation between the common truncatulum^ with 
its turbinate capsules, and your offine^ with its ovato-cylindrical ones, 
contracted at the mouth, that I know not where the line is to be 
drawn. If Gymnostomum affine be reckoned a species, then the G. 
intermedium of authors must be so too. But I confess I had, unless 
your further observations should confirm your present opinion (and I 
will be very open to conviction) rather, at present, keep them as 
varieties — G. truncatidum^ ^ = G. intermedium ; y — G, offiae. The 
leaves, I think, afford no character. The asperity of the upper part 
of the calyptra is so excessively minute that, without the other 
characters of the plant were paramount, I would not lay much stress 
upon it. I had the same plant in view in making variety /3 of trun- 
catulum^ and mentioned the characters as varying from ovate to 
oblong."* 

Passing from this subject, the writer compliments Mr. Wilson upon 
the beauty and accuracy of his sketches. This habit of sketching 
minute plants was, he said, the best way to understand them 
thoroughly. Your MS. observations upon those little favourites of 
mine, the Jungermannise," Sir William wrote : ^* are admirable, I shall 
take the liberty of putting them into my own copy of the ' British 
Jungermannise ' ; those on the mosses I shall keep for my ' Muscologia/ 
* * I . am glad I directed your attention in the ' Muscologia 
Britannica' to Bryum \_Mnium'\ affine^ for I have compared your plant 
with figures and find it to be the true one. I hope you wall find it 
more advanced as to its capsules ; the leaves are quite satisfactory." 

Mr. Wilson, notwithstanding the great authority of his correspon- 
dent, maintained his ground with regard to G^mnostomum offine^ and 
Sir Wm. Hooker at length admitted its specific claims. Writing on 
the 2:3rd June, 1828, he said : 

Before setting out on my Highland excursion on Wednesday next — 
when I shall miss your company — I have many letter debts to pay, 
and amongst them one to you, for from you I have received a very 
long and very interesting communication. To this communication I 
have one, and only one objection, namely, that you should have paid a 
very heavy postage upon it, which entirely belongs to me, and which 
I should most cheerfully have paid had it amounted to twice as much 
and contained only half the information that it does. Pray bear this 
in mind in your future letters. I have already, I think 1 may say 

* See "Mus. Brit., Ed. II." 



Cash : The late Mr. William Wilson. 



205 



entirely, come over to your mind on the subject of your Gpmnostornyni 
—not ojlne, for that name is pre-occupied, but Wilsoni, M8S. ; and 
you will think me unreasonable in requiring the testimony of another 
botanist before 1 could satisfy myself on the subject. Scarcely two 
days after I sent you my last letter, Drummond"^ came to me from 
Forfar, and told me that he had found a new Gymnostomum allied to 
truncatulum. I told him I knew what it was, and would show it to 
him. We then compared his species and yours, which exactly agree ; 
and he (Drummond) declares he could find no specimen to vary from, 
these which were before us. I shall, with your permission, publish 
figures in my ' Botanical Miscellany ' — probably in the next." 

In the same letter Sir William speaks of the fruit of Mmum affine, 
which Mr. Wilson had gathered in perfection shortly before, near 
Over, as " an excellent discovery." It would appear that fruiting 
specimens of this moss had not previously been observed in Britain. 

The letters, of which abstracts are given above, constitute a pleasing 
addition to our knowledge of the history of Pottia Wilsoni, Hook. Mr- 
Wilson gathered the moss in subsequent years in the same locality ; 
and in March, 1831 (as appears by a memorandum he made at that 
time) it was very fine and abundant in the original station. I regret 
not to be able to report that it grows there still. In the spring of this 
year I searched long and carefully for it, but failed to discover any 
trace of its existence. It is, however, recorded from several other 
localities in Britain, and quite recently I have had a specimen sent to 
me from Minehead, in Somersetshire. On the continent it is reported 
as occurring in France and Sardinia. f 

It may be fitting here, as the species has been mentioned, to say a 
little more about Mnium ojffine. About the same time that he found 
the Pottia which bears his name, Mr. Wilson was fortunate enough to 
observe this species with young fruit. The locality, I have reason to 
believe, was Paper Mill Wood, where, three years later (March, 1831), 
he sought it again without success. On the 11th April, 1831, however, 
he came upon fruiting specimens at a place called Dale Ford, the fruit 
being nearly ripe ; but being unable to make further search at the 
time, he determined to devote a day specially to it. Accordingly on 
the 15th of April he set out for Sandiway Head, and by nine o'clock 
in the morning he was on the ground. At the end of the day he had 
the satisfaction of recording that he had found Mnium affine in 

* Thomas Drummond, the distinguished botanist and traveller. 

t Schimper, "Synopsis," p. 152. 



206 



The Naturalist. 



frait, in four stations previously unknown to hiin— fact of wliicli he 
apprised Sir Wm. Hooker in a letter dated April 18th, addiiig that he 
had gathered above thirty specimens. In April of the following year, 
the moss was again found fertile, but not so plentifully except in one 
station ; and on a visit to Knutsford Moor, Mr. Wilson, strange to say, 
found it there also — and that, too, on the day of his discovery on the 
same ground of taluddla sqiiarrosa. 

On March 24th, 1881, Mr. Wilson records the finding of various 
mosses and JungermannisB at Over : Blazia pusilla, was seen with 
perfect fruit ; he also gathered J angermannia obtusifolia. At New- 
church Bog he observed Clima'cium dendroides with over-ripe capsules. 
On April 11th, at Pettypool, he gathered J uiigtrmayinia trichoma nes^ 
J, conaivens, and J. polyanthos, in fruit ; he also observed TetrapJus 
pellucida on a bank on the margin of Newchurch Bog, with fruit ; in 
tke same neighbourhood PJiascum alternifoLinm, ; in Paper Mill Wood 
OrthoiricJium pulchdlmn^ and near Grange Wood Hypnimi polymorphmn, 
Hypn.um filicinum was observed at ^' Wade's Sand hole," but much too 
unripe to gather. Another station for fruiting Hypnum fiUcinum was 
found on a subsequent visit, near Hartford Bridge. On the 4th. of 
May Mr. Wilson, w^ho had shortly before made the acquaintance of 
Mr. J. E. Bowman, went with him to Delamere specially to gather 
fruiting Mnium affine. The journey was a successful one ; they found 
in addition to fruiting specimens of that moss, Junyerm.annia ohtimfolia^ 
in spots not far from the brook below Dale Ford"; also /. 
Francisci and /. exsecca by the roadside as you go down to Dale Ford 
— perhaps fertile." I find memoranda with regard to various other 
mosses and hepatics. One moss which Mr. Wilson met with puzzled 
Mm greatly. He thought it was a species of Dicranuni (Dicraneila) 
and a new one. He first observed it on the 24th of March, 1831, 
whilst rapidly crossing a field below Mr. Little's garden at Over," 
and picked up a large tuft. It may," he wrote, ^* prove to be a 
Gymnodomum, I compared it with fFemia controverm, and was con- 
firmed in my opinion of their being quite distinct." The fruit was 
not quite ripe, and Mr. Wilson confessed that for the time he could 
make nothing of it. He gathered it on subsequent visits, examined it 
and re-examined it, but to no purpose. At length he sent it Sir Wm. 
Hooker, who replied as follows (April 21st, 1831): — 

Your supposed Dicranum is the veritable Gymnodomum microdomum. 
Upon this 1 will stake all my little knowledge of mosses. I almost 
recognised it with the naked eye, and I felt quite sure of it with the 
aid of a single lens. Would that I had as little difiiculty with many 



Cash : The late Mk. William Wilson. 



207 



mosses, which others seem to have no difficulty whatever in deter- 
minino;. In G'pnrwstomjfm microstom-nm tlie capsule does exhibit 
generally, if not an inclination in the capsule, at least an obliquity, 
and that pretty little mouth never can be furnished with sixteen cleft 
teeth. The jaw would not contain them." 

On the loth of May Mr. Wilson, again visiting Over, gathered a 
good stock of the moss, which was to him at the time an 
interesting novelty. Subsequently he corresponded with Mr. Bowinaa 
respecting it, and received fiom that gentleman specimens from 
Derbyshire, which proved to be identical with his own Cheshire 
specimens. 

Mr. Wilson's most notable discoveries at Knutsford in 1831-32 
{Le, Paludella squarrosa and fertile llypnmn Blandovii) were described 
in a previous paper ; there is, therefore, no necessity to refer to them 
in detail here ; but there remain one or two interesting facts to mention 
in connection with his journeys to Knutsford, Baguley Moor, Cattle 
Mill, and other places in that part of Cheshire. On the 19th of April, 
1831, he visited the Bollin Valley, and in Butts Clough gathered 
Mnium undulatnm ''in a good state;" also fruiting JiuKjermmuaa 
iricJiomanen. At Castle Mill he saw *' Hijpmnii salebroum^ with old 
fruit, on the slope in the corner of the field." The moss referred to is 
not the Hi/pnuni mlebromm of Hoffman, but H, glareosutn, Br. and 
Sch. (Bry. Eur.). Edward Hobson was the first to detect it as a British 
moss, and this spot near Castle Mill was where he found it. 

The following memorandum by Mr. Wilson referring to the same 
visit is interesting : — " In Cotteral Clough most of the trees were cut 
down, and I could not find J ungermannia tomentella in fruit. Gathered 
Neckera ymnila with over-ripe fruit on several trees near that on which 
I used to gather it. It ripens about November. Could not see any 
Hypnmn spleudens in fruit." Mr. Wilson crossed over from Ringway 
towards Baguley Moor, and in the fields observed Hypyimyi 'polyniorphuvi 
with nearly ripe fruit. " On Baguley Moor," he wrote, " I gathered 
plenty of B:ypnam admcum., fr., nearly ripe ; Jungermannia creniilata 
with fruit ; and in the splash of water a large thick Chura (new to me) 
along with Qhara vulgaris^ small var. Gathered also Jmtgernianuia 
inflata^ var. a. N.B. — Hypnum ^icorpioides is plentiful in the same 
swampy spot with //. adiincum., but always barren. 1 observed //. 
fiuitam barren on one part of the moor. On returning by the hollow 
way, near Bollin Bridge, I gathered some very tine llypmtm Jilicinim 
iu a good state." 



20S 



The Naturalist. 



The moss referred to in the above extract as Hypnum aduncum is 
our II, examiulatam,^ and is mentioned by Mr. Wilson in a communica- 
tion which appeared in the Naturalid (1st series, vol. ii.) where he 
enters into a critical examination of Hppnum aduncum and its allies. 
" This moss," he says (referring to Hypnum exannulatuw) ^' described in 
* Bryologia Britannica ' under the name of Ilypnmn aduncum^ was first 
found with ripe fruit on Baguley Moor, in April, 1831, and was then, 
and at the time of the publication of ' Bryologia Britannica,' the only 
known moss which could be well referred to Hedwig's Hypnum 
adiincmn^ and there was the great authority of Dr. Swartz for so naming 
it.'' Mr. Wilson shows that the H. aduncum of Hedwig is identical 
with H. vei'iiicosum^ Lindberg ( — H. aduncum var. tenup, Bry. Eur.), 
the aduncum, of Bry. Eur. being our H. TFilsonij formerly found 
fruiting at Aiusdale. With regard to //. exannulaium^ Mr. Wilson 
says in the article cited : ''In Bry. Eur. the leaves are unhappily 
described as ' haud plicata^ for if not actually plicate as in H, uncinaUvm 
— with which it is contrasted, they are remarkably striate, and by this 
obvious mark the moss may always in the field be easily recognised." 

On the 30th January, 1833, Mr. Wilson again visited Eingway, and 
procured a good stock of Hypnum glareosum^ with perfect fruit. He 
also gathered Tortula rigida and J ungermannia turbinafa. Neckera 
pumila in Cotteral Clough, was " over-ripe and very scarce." It is not 
clear what species is referred to in the following memorandum which 
Mr. Wilson made in his journal : — " At the fork in Cotteral Clough 
grows a hypnum, now with young setse, which 1 take to be Hypnum 
JiuviatUe, Brid., having the leaves entire. It may prove to be a variety 
of H, fiticmumy Again, on Feb. 6 Mr. Wilson rode to Cotteral 
Clough for more Hypnum glareosum, and took the opportunity of 
exploring other woods up the Bollin. He writes : " Observed as I 
went along Daltonia \ Qryph(Ba\ heteromalla, Anomodon viiiculosum^ 
Hypnum \_Lesk€a~\ sericeum^ Leucodon sciuroides, and OrtJiotrichnm 
ptdchellum. Hypnum salebrosum is fertile at the entrance of the lane 
near the bottom of Cotteral Clough, on the west side near the gate, 
under a tree, and likely to be abundant. A large dense patch of the 
barren plant is just by, nearer to the gate : this I partly transplanted 
to the fertile spot." 

Mr. Wilson's first visit to Mere Mere was made, I believe, in 1832. 
He went, apparently for its rare phsenogamous plants, Limosdla aquatica 
and Elatine hexandra — which, together with Scirpiis acicula?'is, he 
records having then gathered — but no mention is made of the 
bryological rarities which have contributed to make the place famous. 



Cash : The late Mr. William Wilson. 



209 



It was in the autumn of 1834 that Mr. Wilson first collected Fliy%- 
comitrium sphoericum in that which is still the only known station for 
it in Britain. His botanical journal in the latter half of that year 
was, owing to private circumstances, not kept with the care he had 
previously bestowed upon it, and the only entry I can find 
bearing upon the bryology of Mere is the following, which is without 
specific date : — Made discoveries of several new mosses at Mere, in 
Cheshire, Irlam, &c." 

The most notable of these discoveries was that of the rare PJiysco- 
mitrium ; but Mr. Wilson also found some rare phasca, including 
Fhascum stenophyllum {Phascum sessile^ var. /3 Bry. Brit.), and the rare 
Archidium phascoides. Fruit of Riccia fluitans^ for the first time in 
Britain, was on this occasion discovered. The Irlam discovery was 
fertile Dicranella Schreberu Mr. Wilson communicated these facts to 
his friend Sir Wm. Hooker, who wrote as follows : — 

" Glasgow, November 28th, 1834. 

Dear Sir, — I am much obliged to you for your letter of the 31st of 
October, and would not have suffered a month to have elapsed without 
answering it had I been master of my own time. I have wished 
particularly to congratulate you on your most extraordinary and 
interesting recent cryptogamic discoveries. To say nothing of Gymym- 
tomum \_Physcomitrium~\ sphoericum and other good mosses, I do think 
your having found the fruit of Riccia fluitans a circumstance on which 
you deserve to be congratulated by all lovers of botany. Hundreds have 
searched for it, but no one ever saw it before in that state. I wish 
you would make a drawing of it on a small size such as the space 
included within this pencil line [about 5in. by 2iin.], and write a 
description, and let me publish it — if I am mad enough to go on with 
the ' Botanical Journal.' I am a very great loser by the four numbers 
I have already published ; yet I am very desirous to continue it, for it 
is a means of giving much botanical information to the public which 
would otherwise be entirely lost. I should not be so much a loser if 
the publisher could afford to pay me what I expend upon it, and as he 
is bound to do. But as the sale has not covered the expenses of adver- 
tising, and as the man is poor, I have not the heart to ask him for the 
money. Your Bicranum Schreberianum looks like what Greville and I 
found on Ben-y-Gloe some years ago, and which I suppose is what 
Bridel makes var. jS. Grevilleanum. I cannot lay my hands on my own 
specimens now, and my second edition of ' Muscologia Britannica,' 
where I have figured it, is gone to the binding. But in some con- 
tinental specimens given in Mougeot and Nestler I find the beak of the 



210 



The Naturalist. 



lid varying in length ; never, however, I allow, so long as in Greville's 
figure. In regard to size I have seen German specimens almost twice 
the size of yours, and with a very indistinct struma. ^' ^' 
Most faithfully yours, 

W. J. Hooker" 
On May 6th, 1835, Mr. Wilson again visited Mere. The water was 
very high, and there was no access to any of the mosses seen in the 
previous year. A subsequent visit in the autumn was attended with 
better success. He gathered PJiascum stenopJiyllwn more plentifully 
than in 1834. PJiyscomitrium sphcericum was, however, very scarce, 
and Archidium phascoides scarcely visible where in the preceding 
autumn it had been abundant. The station for these mosses described 
by Mr. Wilson will, I suppose, be that now so well known. " It is,^* 
he says, found by going from the outlet up the west shore until you 
reach a creek. It is between the last willow bush and this creek, on 
the steep face of the ground, in yellowish clayey soil." 

There is one British moss — essentially British, for I believe it has not 
up to the present time been discovered anywhere on the Continent — 
with which Mr. Wilson's name will ever be associated ; it is, more- 
over, one of the rarities occurring within the limits of the Manchester 
flora. I refer to Orthodontium gracile. It was first observed on the 
25th of March, 1833, growing on rocks at Helsby. In his journal of 
that date, Mr. Wilson records having gathered ScMstostega pennata^ and 
^' a new moss — Bryum [PoJilia) amminata ?" Next day he examined 
the moss, and wrote to Sir Wm. Hooker about it, with drawings and 
specimens. On the 27th he again visited Helsby, and gathered " a 
large stock " ; and two days later he made a coloured drawing of what 
he called " the new Pohlia," devoting nearly the whole day to the 
work. This drawing, it is not improbable, was the one subse- 
quently published along with Mr. Wilson's description of the moss 
(under the name of Bryum gracile) in the Supplement to English 
Botany. 

In 1831 Mr. Wilson determined the connection between ScMstostega 
pennata and the shining moss," which, it had previously been main- 
tained, was an independent growth, and respecting which Mr. J. E. 
Bowman had written an elaborate memoir in the Magazine of Natural 
History. The appearance of the young confervoid shoots of Schistos- 
tega^ shining with a metallic green lustre, under favourable conditions 
as to the light, will not be unfamiliar to those who have seen this 
beautiful moss in its favourite abodes. I have never seen it so 
brilliant as it is at Rowter Rocks, in Derbyshire, where it first excited 



Cash : The late Mr. William Wilson. 



211 



Mr. Bowman's attention. The moss was considered very rare at the 
time of which I write. Only a few stations for it had been discovered. 
In one of his letters to Mr. Bowman, Mr. Wilson enclosed a specimen 
of the rare Daltonia splacJmoides ; Mr. Bowman, in return, sent his 
friend a specimen of what he described as the not less rare " Sckis^ 
todega penyiata. 

But, with regard to the shining moss," so called ; on the 21st of 
May, 1831, Mr. Wilson made an examination of specimens sent him 
by Mr. Bowman, and saw reason to suspect their true nature. On the 
23rd he made this entry in his journal : " Examined the shining moss 
of Rowter Cavern, and fully satisfied myself of its being a confervoid 
state of Schistostega pennata, of which I detected an example in a state 
of transition from one to the other ; and made drawings." He wrote 
Mr. Bowman an account of what he had seen, enclosing the specimen 
between talcs, displayed for his examination, and also with drawings 
copied from his (Mr. Wilson's) own sketches. Again, on the 24th of 
May, he observed several other instances of young ScJiistodega plants 
with confervoid shoots from the base of the stem. He prepared a 
drawing of this, at Mr. Bowman's request, for the Magazine of Nat. 
History. 

There had been a controversy as to the splitting of the lid in 
Schistostega ] Mr. Wilson had made it a matter of careful investigation, 
and his conclusions are stated at length in Bryologia Britannica." 
It may not be uninteresting to quote the following extract from a letter 
addressed to him by Sir Wm. Hooker, and dated June 5th, 1831 : — 
Your account of the examination of ScJiidostega has gratified me 
very much. It has proved the fallacy of Hedwig's character of the 
operculum most satisfactorily. Now, must this genus be restored to 
Gymnostomum ? Assuredly, as genera are at present defined — derived 
wholly from the fructification, it cannot be separated ; yet, if foliage 
and habit be taken into account, and the nature, too, of the operculum, 
Schistostega may well be distinguished from every other moss, and I 
should wish to keep it separate, though with another name ; so I should 
like to have Fissidens distinguished from DicranumP 

In closing this communication I will only mention a few other 
mosses and hepatics which Mr. Wilson records having gathered in 
Cheshire, between the years 1831 and 1836. 

In July, 1831, he visited a place called Sinks Moss, near Knutsford, 
in order to gather Malaxis paludosa, but returned home unsuccessful. 
The place was partly enclosed and cultivated. He, however, gathered 
Splachnum ampullaceum^ a moss which seems to have been more common 



212 



The Naturalist. 



in those days than it is now, on the Lancashire and Cheshire bogs. 
Sinks Moss is now all under cultivation, but the locality retains some 
remnants of its former cryptogamic flora, for I have within the last few 
years gathered Bicranella cerviculata on the peaty ditch bank thereabout. 

Hypnum nitens and H. stellatum were gathered in fruit at Knutsford 
May, 1832, about the time when Mr. Wilson made his more important 
discoveries of Hypnum Blandovii and Paludella squarrosa. H, stellatum, 
fertile, I have myself gathered at Knutsford recently ; H. nitens, how- 
ever, has not been found with fruit for many years. I believe the 
fertile plants were destroyed by the drainage which destroyed Paludella 
squarrosa. 

In April, 1834, Mr. Wilson gathered Fkascum alter nifoliwn, "in 
excellent state," at Grappenhall ; and Gymnostomum tenue at Lymm, 
the latter being one of the stations recorded in Bry. Brit. 

Pottia Heimii was gathered in April, 1835, at Norton Marsh, and 
also at Gate Wharf, near Warrington. 

Tetrodontium Brownianmi, barren, was, in May of the same year, 
observed by Mr. Wilson growing abundantly on the roof of a small 
cave near the highest part of Helsby Hill. 

On June 17th, 1833, Mr. Wilson gathered, on Congleton Cloud, 
Dicranum Scottianum in fruit — (I may say that I visited this hill last 
spring, but could not then find the moss). On the banks of the Dane, 
near Bosley, Mr. Wilson found Orthotriclium rivulare and Leskea 
polycayya. The latter species he also gathered about the same time at 
Rosthern Mere, where I understand it still grows. 

On the 16th March, 1836, Mr. Wilson found Phascum crispum at 
Appleton, growing associated with Gymnostomum microstomum ; and on 
Stretton Moss Splachium ampullacewn, Tortula rewluta he gathered 
at Appleton in the following month. 

Other mosses recorded from Cheshire by Mr. Wilson at various 
times are — 

Dicranum Schraderi, Oakmere ; Wybunbury Bog (c. fr.) 
Hypnum ccdspitosum, Frodsham. 

Bryum roseum, c. fr., Near Over. — (First found by Mr. Wilson's 
brother.) 

Fissidens exilis. Butts Clough, 1834. 

Leskea latehrkola, Paper Mill Wood, near Over, with fr., Feb., 1828. 
Hypnum chrysophyllum, at Grappenhall, and also near Over. 
Hypnum giganteum, c. fr., Wybunbury Bog. 
Manchester, 1884. 



Polecat, (kc. — Can any reader of the Naturalist give instances 
of the recent occurrences of the polecat or martin, or mention localities 
for the blind worm or glowworm in Yorkshire 1 — G. Roberts, Lofthouse, 
Wakefield. 

Laverna phragmiteUa in Yorkshire. — As will be seen from the report 
of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union excursion on Whit-Monday, this 
interesting species, hitherto unrecorded for the county, was collected by 
Lord Walsingham, at Sherburn. The larvae were detected feeding 
in the Typha heads growing near the railway station, and several heads 
exhibited at the meeting of the Entomological Section seemed to be full 
of them. His lordship says the insect '"is usually regarded as a fen species, 
but is in fact, very widely distributed, occurring probably almost every- 
where where Typha latifolia and T. angustifolia abound." He has ^' found 
it certainly from Cannes, in the south of France to Yorkshire, throughout 
the whole distance. The efi"ect it produces when feeding makes the seed 
heads of Typha very conspicuous at a distance. Unafi'ected heads appear 
solid or burst at one side and fall away ; affected heads are swollen and 
matted together by the larvse, which attack the downy seed and bind it 
together by their galleries and cocoons, preventing it from falling to the 
ground when it becomes detached from the stem, and thus preserving it 
as a conspicuous object after the unatfected heads have become mere 
naked stems." — G. T. Porritt. 

Insects at Cambridue. — Mr. Mosley asked the question last March, 
** Where are the Insects?" I might repeat the query now, and echo 
would answer, where ? Some of them are common enough in all con- 
science, Hyalopterits pruni is swarming on our plum trees, and Myzus 
rihis disfigures the red currant bushes ; but, of course, by insects " we 
mean Lepidoptera, and where are they ? Most species worth mentioning 
are, as far as Cambridge is concerned, conspicuous by their absence. 
White butterflies are common enough ; I scarcely remember seeing them 
more so ; but as for the moths, with the exception of such species as 
Sesia tipuli/ormis, Acronycta psi, Plusia chrysitis, Gonoptera lihatriXj 
Pionea forficalis, and Spilonota snffusana (all of which are abundant 
enough), they are scarce. I have sugared again and again, this spring 
and summer, but the moths seem to have joined a iepidopterous blue 
ribbon army ; " for sugar, beer, and rum, have proved the reverse of 
attraction to them. I notice the absence of many species I have been 
accustomed to see, all the more, because I am making out a list of the 
lepidoptera occurring in the neighbourhood of Cambridge, and so I am 
carefully investigating the subject, and am constantly on the look-out for 
specimens. Eudorea pyralalis swarms about our strawberry beds, but it 
does not abound anywhere else. What does the larva feed on ? There is 
no moss anywhere near, nor yet lichen in any great plenty. — A. H. 
Waters, Cambridge. 



Kniufall for |Ho. 





Height 

of 
gHU^e 


falL 


No. 

of 


Total Fall 
TO Date. 


Date of 
}i6<j viest 


Amount 
of 

heaviest 
Fail. 




above 
level. 


Davb 


1884. 


1883. 


Fall. 


Hi^DDERSFlELD (Dalton) ... 

\o . VV , JA.UDSO tl ) 


Ft. 

350 


In. 
1-69 


11 




LZ 14 


3 


0-67 


Leei^s ... (Alfred Ueniiy)... 


loo 




11 


10-36 


S-41 t 


0 


U oA. 


MOHf^FOT-tTH ... (JrtJUCiS Fox) 




I'Ol 


1 9 


1 1 'HQ 
Li Uo 


11 f o + 


1 9 


n*9'=v 
u z»> 


Halifax. . , (F. Ct. S. Ka.'i^''soii) 




2 '50 


Lo 


17 *34 


1/ 00 


1 


0 Or) 


Barnsley ... (Dr Sadler)... 


350 


0-86 


10 


10.22 


9-66 


3 


0-27 


Ingbirch WORTH (Mr. Taylor) 


8.53 


2-52 


12 


16-82 


14-30 


3 


0-50 


Wentworth Castle ( Mr. 

Fisher) 


520 


1-27 


11 


11-39 


11 Ti) 


3 


0-32 


GoOLE .... (J. Harrison).. 


25 


0-72 


9 


8-24 


9-67 


6 


¦15 


H ULL ( Derringhani) (Wm . 

Lawton) 


10 


0.G4 


11 


0 Lv 




6 


•12 


ScARBORo' (A. Rowntree)... 


130 


0-71 


14 


9-44 


9-21 11 


12 


15 


nruii3i>jtr / Tin Ll ot'cV»AT^ 


100 


1 09 


9 


11-38 




19 


0*21 


(W. Gregson) 










Shad WELL (Geo. Paul) 


500 


1-15 


11 











* Average to date for 18 years, 1866-83. 
t Average of 30 years, 1853-62, & 1865-84. X Average of 15 years, 1870-84. 
§ Average of 34 years, 1850-83. |! Average fall for April (18 years). 



iveporls of Societies. 

Barnsley Naturalists' Society. — Meeting June lOtli, Mr. T. Lister 
in the chair. — A box of coleoptera found at Bishop's Wood on the Sher- 
fourn Excursion was exhibited. The local Excursion for this month was 
fixed to Ryhll and Hiendley Dam on the 26th. The bird report is brief 
— all the warblers were reported as arrived by May 9th — the last were, 
Apr. 21st grasshopper warbler, 24th sedge -warbler, 25th whinchat, 27th 
spotted fly-catcher, 30th sedge-warbler, black-cap, May 1st wood-warbler, 
2ud night-jar, 4th swift, 5th nightingale, singing until tirst week of June 
to the delight of many, six miles from Barnsley ; a second, two miles 
from the town, which being disturbed, disappeared ; a third is also 
reported ; 7th land-rail, 9th garden warbler, lesser whitethroat. Most 
of these came near the average time, those reported in March and first 
week in April were very early — as the wheat ear and willow-warbler 22nd, 
chiff-chaff Mar. 2nd, sand-martin Apr. 11. Nineteen gulls (L. canus) 
were seen flying over Langsett, May 26th. Mr. Hailstone writes of eight 
black -headed gulls, and a tern at Walton Lake, June 1st, staying only 
one hour, and on the 13th June, a pair of terns. — T. Lister. 

Bradford Naturalists' Society. — Meeting, June 4th, 1884. Mr. 
J. W. Carter presided. Mr. lllingworth reported a visit to Grange, 
where he found L. ArguAm, A. Euphrosyne, and N. Lncina ; he also 



Rkports of Societies 



215 



exhibited eggs of three species of sea-birds. Mr. Soppitt reported a visit 
to Windermere and Grange, where he found Cochko.ria anglvza^ Vicia 
sativa, &c. ; he also described a visit to Goit Stock. Mr. Carter described 
a visit to Grange, where he found Geranium mnguinetmi, the rock rose, 
common barberry, tSphayniim papillosuw,y <S. acutifolium ^ &c. Mr. Bean- 
land showed a number of plants from Goole, among which were Allium 
scorodoprasnm, Carex vnlpina, C. riparia, Comani'tn palustre, &c, Mr. 
Spencer exhibited Orchis Morio from Grange. Mr. West reported a visit 
to Scawfell, where he observed Thalictrum minus, Trollius EuropjoPAis^ 
tSaxifraga stellaris, Plautago lacustris, Salix herbacea^ Carex rigida, &c. 
Mr. Eastwood exhibited Saxifraga granulata, &c. , from Holden Wood. 

Meeting, June 17th, 1884, Mr. Soppitt in the chair.— Mr. Carter 
reported a ramble to Holden Wood, Mr. Bennett reported a visit to 
Broughton Woods, Lines., where he found the lily of the valley abundant, 
Mr. Soppitt exhibited, on behalf of Mr. Hebden, uSLcidium convallartcB, 
growing on the lily of the valley ; Mr. B. Spencer, a monstrous form of 
Geum rivale, in which one flower, instead of stamens has another flower 
growing from the centre, and a daisy, with small flowers growing out of 
one large one ; Mr. Barraclough exhibited Cardanrme prateusis witli 
twelve petals, and described a number of plants he had observed about 
Bolton Woods ; Mr. Carter, Carabus glabratus, collected by Mr. West on 
Helvellyn, C. violaceus, C. uitens, and Harpalus protens from Rombald's 
Moor ; Mr. Terry, a number of moths from Witherslack ; L. 'noarginata 
and V. canibricaria from Holden Wood. Mr. B. Spencer read a paper on 

Plant Lore," in which he gave an account of the origin of the wearing 
of flowers as emblems, &c. , — especially the rose, thistle, shamrock, and 
leek, — in the British Isles, and the various flowers used as emblems hj 
other nations of Europe. Mr. Illingworth described a visit to Grange, 
and exhibited a number of plants collected there, including Orchis 
maculata, Osynunda regalis, &c. 

Hull Field Naturali?-ts' Society. — On June 14th the third excur- 
sion of this society took place, when upwards of sixty members and 
friends proceeded by road and rail to Hornsea. The party assembled at 
Hornsea Bridge Station, on arrival of the train leaving Hull at 2.5, and 
after short preliminary addresses on the chief characteristics of the 
locality and the species which might be expected to be found, three divi- 
sions were formed for investigating different p4)rtions of the ground. The 
geological party proceeded to the beach, and inspected the sections formed 
by the washing away of the cliffs, observing in one place the remains of 
an old lake basin. A number of striated and polished boulders character- 
istic of the boulder clay of the neighbourhood were also seen. The botan- 
ical and zoological sections visited the neighbourhood of the Mere. The 
botanists observed 157 species of plants, amongst the most interesting of 
which may be named two orchids, O. ustulata and U. incarnata and 
the adder's tongue fern, Ophioglossum vulgatum. The entomologists 
met with moderate success, specimens of twelve species being taken. Th^ 



The Naturalist. 



ornithologists reported the occurrence of 43 species of birds, including 
great-crested grebe, mallard, coot, water-hen, teal, kestrel, sparrow- 
hawk, carrion-crow, gold-crested wren, &c. The heron was found breed- 
ing, and there was a concurrence of opinion that this bird has increased 
in the district in the last two or three years. Several nests of the reed- 
warbler were taken, and a number of eggs of coot, water-hen, sedge 
warbler, reed- warbler, garden- warbler, black-headed bunting, white- 
throat, bullfinch, spotted fly-catcher, &c. 

Lancashire and Chehhire Entomological Society. — Meeting, 
May 28th, the president (Mr. S. J. Capper) occupying the chair. — A 
paper communicated by Mr. S. L. Mosley, of Huddersfield, on "Bird 
Protection in its Relation to Insect Life," was read. The author blamed 
the action of the Wild Birds Protection Act for much of the scarcity of 
insects of all orders during the last few years — an opinion, however, 
which most of those present did not entirely endorse. A conversazione 
followed, during which Mr. Pierce and Dr. Ellis exhibited recent addi- 
tions to their collections. — J. W. Ellis, Hon. Sec. 

OvENDEN Naturalists' Society. — Monthly meeting. May 31st, Mr. 
T. Scott in the chair. — The following botanical specimens collected during 
the day, were exhibited by Messrs. Sheard and Bullock : — Cardamine 
pratensis, Lotus cornimlatus, Viola canina, Tormentilla officinalis, Pedicu- 
laris palustrisj Ajuga reptans, Stellaria Holostea, Polygala vidgaris, Gera- 
nium Rohertianum, Lactuca virvsa, Hyaciuthus nonscriptus, Eanunmlus 
aqnatilis, Alchemilla vulgaris, Vicia sativa, Oxalis acetosella, Chcerophyl- 
lum sativum, and Vinca minor. — J. Ogden, Sec. 

York Field Naturalists' and Scientific Society. — Monthly meeting, 
June 11th, the chair being occupied by Mr. Geo. Benson. — Mr. H. J. 
Wilkinson (hon. sec. ) exhibited a fresh specimen of the rare and local 
Carex paradoxa, also the following rare British plants : — Trinia vidgaris, 
Gentiana verna, and Alchemilla conjuncta. On behalf of Mr. Thomas 
Watson, specimens of the Moorgrass (Nes^erm cceridea) snidBartsia alpina, 
Mr. Button exhibited a fine series of Hydrelia unca and Fhibalapteryx 
lignata ; also the following fresh-water shells : — A nodonta anatina, TJnio 
tumidus, U. pictorum, Faludina vivipara, and Sphoerium rivicola ; as well 
as eggs of the snipe {Scolopax gallinago) and bullfinch {Fyrrhula vulgaris,) 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. — Sherburn, June 2nd. — This year's 
Whit-Monday meeting was highly successful, and is especially noteworthy 
as being the first occasion on which the new president, Lord Walsingham, 
occupied the chair. To do this he travelled specially from Merton Hall, 
Norfolk, and arrived at Sherburn in the course of the afternoon. In 
addition to providing for the entomologists access to Bishop's Wood, two 
parties had been arranged for, one to Scarthingwell and Towton, the 
other to Ledsham and Ledstone, The attendance for the first-named of 
these parties was very large, the rendezvous being Church Fenton Station, 



Reports of Societies. 



217 



winch was left about a quarter before ten. Arrived at Scarthingvvell 
Park, the members were met by the Hon. H. C. Maxwell-Stuart, J. P., 
and two of his sons, who spared nothing that lay in their power to pro- 
mote the enjoyment of the members. Some of the party elected to take 
an extended route northwards, under charge of Major Thompson, and 
left the Park for Saxton Carr and the woods about Towton Spring. 
Most of the work done on this route was botanical. From Towton 
Spring the route lay through the wood known as Renshaw, and up the 
valley of the River Cock, which is here a clear and winding and very 
swift stream. On Towton Battle-field the remainder of the party were 
met ; they had spent a most profitable hour in examining the superb 
collections of foreign lepidoptera and birdskins, as well as of minerals, 
agates, &c., which had been collected and brought home by the Hons. 
Herbert and Arthur Maxwell-Stuart. After this they had investigated 
*the lake by means of boats, and thence — under the able guidance of Mr. 
B. Saynor — proceeded to the battlefield of Towton, to rejoin Major 
Thompson's contingent, afterwards making their way to Sherburn village. 
The Ledsham party, which had Mr. George Roberts for leader, assembled 
at Micklefield Station in the forenoon, and included several naturalists 
from Leeds, Wakefield, &c. After examining an extensive limestone 
quarry near the Station the members struck into a footpath and entered 
the Ledsham estates, permission to explore which had been granted by 
Mr. C. W. Wheler, J. P. In the woods the blackcap, garden-warbler, 
sedge-warbler, wood warbler, chifi'-chafi', thrush, blackbird, wren, chaf- 
finch, oxeye tit, and robin were all in song. One nest with young (black- 
cap) was found. Search for shells was not productive, the soil and 
vegetation being too dry. The site of the Beacon" was passed, also the 
lodge mentioned by Thoresby as having been built about 1680. Passing 
across the park and the great beech avenue w^hich Lord Strafford is said 
to have planted about 1620, the lane was then followed to Ledsham, and 
the woods were again entered. At Ledsham was found a new station for 
Clematis vitalba, and Rosa pimpinellifolia was observed growing in the 
Park. In the wood was found a wild gooseberry growing on the top of 
an isolated rock. Here were also found Clausilia rugosa, Buiimus 
obscurus. Helix rufescens, and H. rotundata. The Beacon was again 
approached, and after a parting look at the glorious sylvan scenery of 
Ledsham, the party crossed the Selby road and made towards Sherburn. 
Near Sherburn many large specimens of the spindle-tree were noticed in 
flower, and Erigeron acris was picked up. At Newthorpe was found a 
new station for the deadly nightshade (Atropa Belladonna). At Ledsham 
swallows and martins were flying about the Church, and about a score 
swifts were flying about Sherburn Church. Helix aspersa was found in 
the latter churchyard, and it was noticed that some of the ash trees were 
scarcely in leaf. The lepidopterists were in great force, most of them 
spending the day in Bishop's Wood. The tea and meetings were all held 
in the old Court House, adjoining the Red Bear Inn, Sherburn. The 



218 



The NATUiiALTST. 



cliair at the general meeting was occupied by the president, the Right 
Hon. Lord Walsingham, and the Union was honoured by the presence of 
the Hons. H. C, Herbert, and Arthur Maxwell-Stuart. The minutes 
of the Roche ilbbey meeting having been read and confirmed, the roll of 
societies was called. It was found that 2i societies were represented, 
viz : — Huddersfield, Heckmondwike, Barnsley, Wakefield, Eiland-cum- 
Greetland, Leeds (3), Liversedge, Goole, York (2), Selby, Hull (2). 
Dewsbury, Maiton, Doncaster (2), Scarborough, and Bradford (Micro- 
scopical Society). The attendance of individual members was con- 
siderably over a hundred. The president, in his opening remarks, 
after thanking the Union for his election, observed that it was difficult to 
exaggerate the amount of good which such associations are capable of 
eflecting, Not only do they afford to those who live in towns the much- 
needed means of becoming acquainted with those delights which are 
especially associated with country life — too often hidden from many 
throughout the greater part of their lives by a veil of smoke — but they 
C03) tribute greatly to the cultivation of scientific tastes and enlist numerous 
workers, whose united exertions in the field of science cannot fail to throw 
at least occasional gleams of light upon some of the many interesting 
problems connected with natural history which are perpetually presenting 
themselves for solution. He then said that everything connected with 
the county possessed the utmost interest for him, and he rejoiced to be 
able to share with his Yorkshire neighbours those healthful pursuits and 
interests which afi'ord so large a measure of contentment and happiness 
to all who know their value ; and which at the same time are by no means 
wasted if they contribute ever so little to that great structure of know- 
ledge which inch by inch and atom by atom scientific research throughout 
the world is continually engaged in strengthening and enlarging, unde- 
terred by the reflection that to finish and complete it must be through all 
time a task beyond the range of human powers. His lordship concluded 
by urging the claims of the Union to further support, especially from the 
associates. The following new members were then elected -.— Misses 
Frances A. and Mary A. B. Crossley of Maltby ; Miss Edith Milner of 
Bishopthorpe, near York ; Messrs. T. Carter Mitchell of Topchtie, Robt. 
Peach of Harrogate, Richard Thompson of York, W. H. Hudleston, 
M.A., J.P., F.RS., &c., of Weybridge, J. Lee Cover of Sherburn, 
Philip Sewell of Whitby, and Major B. B. Thompson of Harrogate. It 
was unanimously and heartily resolved, on the motion of Dr. H. F. 
Parsons, F. G. S. (an old member whom all were pleased again to see), 
seconded by Mr. C. P. Hobkirk, F.L.S., of Dewsbury, that the best 
thanks of the Union be voted to the Hon. H. C. Maxwell-Stuart, J.P., 
of Scarthingwell, to Mr. C. W. Wheier, J. P., of Ledstone Park, and 
to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, for the permission so readily accorded 
to the members to visit their respective estates. Mr. Maxwell-Stuart 
replied, after which thanks were voted to Major Thompson, Mr. B. 
Saynor and Mr. Geo. Roberts for placing their extensive knowledge of 



Reports of Societies. 



219 



the country at the disposal of their fellow-members by acting as leaders 
of parties. The sectional reports were then given. For the Concho- 
logical Section its president, the Rev. W. C. Hey, M.A., of York, in a 
much-appreciated speech, stated that although not very much had been 
done, yet three species additional to the previously recorded fauna had 
turned up, viz., Zonites nitidus, Pisidium pusillum, and P. fontinale. 
Including these, the total number of species observed was 29. The 
streams near the station had produced Physa fontinalis, Limngea 
palustris, L. peregra and var. ovata, Planorbis carinatus and P. coriipla- 
natus. Some of the Planorbes showed a tendency to interesting distortions. 
Yalvata cristata and V. piscinalis also occurred. Of land shells were 
noted Helix arbustorum, H. nemoralis, H. aspersa, H. cantiana, H. 
rufescens, H. hispida, H. rotundata, Clausilia laminata (Bishop's Wood), 
Cochlicopa lubrica, Zonites cellarius, Z. nitidulus, and Succinea elegans . 
The Entomological Section reported, through its president, Mr. Geo. T. 
Porritt, F.L.S,, Huddersfield : — Most of the collecting had been 
done in Bishop's Wood, but the most interesting species, Laverna 
phragmitella, new to the county, was taken by Lord Walsingham at 
Sherburn. His lordship also noticed Laverna epilobiella, and the larva 
of Nonagria typh«}. The large party working Bishop's Wood were led by 
Messrs. G. C. Dennis and P. Diitton of York. Larvae of Tfeniocampa 
populeti were taken in profusion (two trees ah^ne yielding, over 100), along 
with a sprinkling of those of Tethea subtusa from the poplars ; and other 
species taken as larvae or imagos included x4rgynnis Euphrosyne, common, 
Arctia mendica, Orgyia pudibunda, Phigalia pilosaria, Plimera pennaria, 
abundant, Ephyra punctaria, Asthena candidata, Eupisteria heparata, 
Agriopis Aprilina, Phoxopteryx Lundana abundant, Epliippiph(jra Brun- 
nichiana, E. phlugiana common, and others, including several micros new 
to the district, but of which a complete list is not yet made out. The 
botanists mustered in greatest numbers, and were well pleased with the 
day's work. 266 flowering plants and ferns were observed, the 
following being worthy of special mention : — Phanerogams : Clematis 
vitalba, Actyea spicata, Barbarea stricta, Foiygala depressa, Galium 
Mollugo, Sium latifolium, Valeriana dioica, Atropa Belladonna, Antir- 
hinum Orontium, Veronica montana, Acorus Calamus, Potaniogeton 
densus, Cephaianthera ensifolia, and Ophrys apifera. All the throe 
officers of the section were present, and the president, Mr. Thomas Hick, 
B.A., B Sc., of Harrogate, gave the report at the general meeting. The 
weather was too dry for cryptogams. Two were found in Bishop's 
Wood by Mr. J. Harrison of Goole — ^cidiom violse and Peridermium 
pini. In the absence of the officers of the Geological Section, Mr. B. 
Holgate, F.G.S., reported. Two parties worked over the magnesian 
limestone and marl, which present many features not by any means 
thoroughly understood, concerning which various theories have been 
advanced, and consequently about which there is much to note and learn 
The first place visited by the party (which met at Church Fenton Park) 



220 



The Naturalist. 



was Scarthingwell Park, the distance from Church Fenton Station to 
Scarthingwell being along a level road upon clay. It is only at the 
Lake at Scarthingwell that the limestone passes upwards in a gentle slope 
from under the drift, the luxuriance of the wych elm, the red colour of 
the soil, and other features of the country showing this. The Messrs. 
Maxwell-Stuart very kindly conducted the party by a short road through 
the Park to the Dinton Dale quarry, about which there is much that is 
interesting to students of this system, the beds being numerous and 
diversified, with partings of marl between them. Some of these were 
flaggy dolomites nearly approaching lithographic stone, whilst others 
contained numerous cavities lined with crystallised carbonate of lime 
similar to that which is so common in the neighbourhood of Pontefract. 
In a quarry near to the place marked on the map as the Towton Battle- 
field, on the right-hand of the road between Saxton and Towton, a good 
many of the pieces were found to resemble, on a rough examination, the 
rocks of the oolitic system, being formed in numerous small pellicles like 
the roe of a fish, but on closer examination many were found to be hollow, 
and it does not appear to have been formed in the same way as the true 
oolites have been. The Huddlestone quarries are so well known, that 
the specimens from them scarcely require description. It forms a good 
building stone (which the stone from the other two quarries do not), and 
presents a good appearance. The other party started from Micklefield 
and worked by way of Ledstone and Ledsham. They were successful in 
finding several fossils which, excepting the Axinus, are not common in 
the district. They found an internal cast of a Phynconella, a specimen 
of Littorinella, and a piece of flint in a bed of limestone six inches thick, 
near to Ledsham Church. For the Vertebrate Section its secretary, Mr. 
James Backhouse, jun., York, reported that 26 resident birds were 
observed, and 18 migrants, whilst 22 species were found nesting. The 
Scarthingwell Park pond forms a great attraction for wild birds, of which 
were noticed herons, coots, and water-hens in fair abundance. The reed- 
warbler breeds annually in the reeds by the water's edge, but no birds could 
be identified. This is probably (with one exception) the most northerly 
limit of its breeding range in England. Amongst the migrant birds noted 
were two not seen on the last excursion — the garden warbler and spotted 
flycatcher. A very curious nesting-place was discovered for the song- 
thrush : growing against the trunk of a tree was a huge fungus, forming 
a solid ledge, and upon this the nest was placed ; whilst immediately 
above was another fungoid growth which served as a dome or roof. The 
nest being empty, was conveyed to Sherburn, and shown at the evening 
meeting. Amongst the fishes, pike, roach, and trout were noticed ; and 
water shrew, common shrew, squirrel, and hedgehog amongst the 
mammals. — The meeting closed with a vote of thanks to the president for 
his services m the chair, proposed in a humorous speech from Mr. 
Barwell Turner, F.C.S., Leeds, and seconded by Major Thompson. 
- W.D.R., W.E.C. 

i 



I 



^ 



