Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



' i'^'t"f'ititit'it't'ititititif'ititit'iti ^ 



Harvard College 
Library 




raOM THE FDND IN HBHOKT Or 

HARRY HOWARD HILL 

CLASS OF 1«*T 
FOB ENGLISH LITEBATURt 



Holiday studies 



OF 



WORDSWORTH 



By Rivers. Woods, and Alps. 



THE WHARFE, THE DUD DON, 

AND 

THE STELVIO PASS. 



BY 



REV. F. A. MALLESON, M.A., 

VICAR OF BROUGHTON-IN-FURNESS, 
AUTHOR OF ** JESUS CHRIST, HIS LIFE AND WORK," ** ACTS AND EPISTLES OF ST. PAUL;" 



EDITOR OF "RUSKIN'S LETIERS TO THE CLERGY ON THE LORD's PRAYER, 

E'lC. ETC. 



»> 



??? 



CASSELL & COMPANY. Limited: 

LONDON, PARIS 6- MELBOURNE. 

1890. 



V 



JUN 30 1926 JA 

i'SRAB"! 



DEDICATION. 




OT alone as homage due to distinguished rank, but much more 
as a poor (would it were a rich!) tribute ^ to conspicuous, yet 
modest civic, social and domestic, virtue, and a lofty and dignified 
patriotism as noble and generous as it is affecting, I dedicate (by 
permission) to 

WILLIAM. SEVENTH DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE. K.G., F.R.S.. etc., 

this feeble attempt (associated with other earlier writings) to portray the 
natural beauties and to record some of the historic memories of one of 
the ancestral homes and sacred fanes of England. 

F. A. Malleson. 



PREFACE. 



¦ o> 



tHE present Volume is a small collection of papers written at 
rather distant intervals, of which the partiality of kind friends 
has encouraged me to believe that they would not willingly allow 
them to be lost 

They have therefore been gathered together, by courteous permission 
of the editors, out of the magazines in which they originally appeared, 
with the exception of the paper on ** Bolton Abbey," written in 1889, 
which has not been printed before. 

The Westmorland Girl died in my own parish in 1872, and the 
paper so entitled appeared in Sunday at Homem 1873. "Wordsworth 
and the Duddon " — the result of a couple of days spent in solitude, 
pencil in hand, in the beautiful Duddon Valley — appeared in Good 
Words in 1883. Considerable additions, however, have been made 
since then. These three pieces are therefore more or less illustrations 
of the life and works of a great Poet Laureate. The " Swiss Notes " 
and the " Stelvio Pass " were written during a sojourn of three weeks 
at the Baths of Bormio, as English chaplain, in Sept., 1883, and, like 
the Duddon paper, the latter was entirely written in pencil on the 
spot, with those grand Alpine scenes before my eyes — even when I 
could scarcely hold my pencil for the cold at an elevation of close upon 
ten thousand feet. The last two papers have appeared in Anglo-Austria^ 
a well-conducted magazine, first published in January, 1890, at Meran in 
Tyrol. 

The grateful duty remains of returning sincerest thanks to Lady 
Louisa Egerton for her most kind and able assistance in the historical 
portion of the paper on Bolton Abbey, without which assistance the 
author would scarcely have ventured upon this undertaking ; also to 
the Rev. A. P. Hows, Rector of liolton Abbey, whose interesting guide 
book has rendered valuable assistance. 



CONTENTS. 



BOLTON ABBEY. 

PAGE 

Part I. — Historical : Modem History hardly less sorrowful (ban Mediaeval— First View of 
the Abbey — Wharfedale in Primeval Times— Antiquity of the Church of Bolton — The 
Tragedy of the Strid and the Foundation of Bolton Priory — Wordsworth — Traces of 
its Early History— The Western Tower— ** Blackfaced Clifford"— The Shepherd 
Lord — The Nut-brown Maid— Bolton Abbey Granted to the Cliffords of Skipton — 
Disputes between the Lords of Craven — The Rising in the North — The White Doe of 
Rylstone and the Fate of the Nortons— Personal Habits of the Lords of Skipton 
Castle — The Castle and its Historic Portraits — The Buccaneering Lord — Anne 
Countess of Dorset and her State — The Countess Pillar— The Bolton Abbey Estates, 
and the House of Cavendish 13 

Part n.— Descriptive : The Strid— Rev. W. Carr and the Picturesque Rustic Seats— The 
Loveliness of the AVoods in Spring — Subdued Light for Woodland Scenery — Barden 
Tower — Characteristics of Spring Foliage — The Mountain Ash and above-ground 
Roots— The Valley of Desolation— The Great Waterspout of 1826— Posforth Gill- 
Formation of Mountain Streams — Heber's Ghyll — Weathering of Rocks — Bolton 
Abbey Churchyard — Nature the Beautifier of Ruin and Decay — Lord Frederick 
Cavendish — The Good Time that will come, '* though it tarry " 28 



WORDSWORTH'S " WESTMORLAND GIRL. 



)) 



Broughton-in-Fumess and the Duddon — Sarah Mackereth "The Westmorland Girl" — 
Her Beauty and Refinement— Fading Away — Unexpected Discovery that she was 
Wordsworth's Heroine, his "Lamb Deliverer" — Story of the Deliverance of the Lamb 
from Drowning — The Scene by Grasmere Lake — Primitive Times at Grasmere — Sarah 
Tolling the Passing Bell — Sarah " loved all things great and small " — Nathaniel Haw- 
thorne at Grasmere — Passing away — Visited by Angels — Laid at rest in Broughton 
Churchyard — Human Interest needed for the True Enjoyment of Beautiful Scenery ... 39 



X Contents. 

WORDSWORTH AND THE DUDDON. 

I'ACtS 

Duddon Sonnets—A Two Days' solitary Visit to the Duddon Valley in September, 1882— 
Seathwaite Tarn — Birks Brigg and Gowdrel Dub — Glittering Transparency of the 
Water— Cockley Beck — Division of the Valley — Hardknot and VVrynose — Wild Deer 
— Three Shire Stones — Source of the Duddon — Dioptrics of a running Brook — Varieties 
of Effects in a Mountainous Country — Coming down to the Pastures and the Farms — 
Seathwaite Church — Rev. Robert Walker ** The Wonderful " — Original Information — 
Stepping-Stones — Wallabanrow Crag — The Red Felsite Dike — Ulpha Kirk — Dunner- 
dale Fells — Duddon Woods— Duddon Hall— Rowfold Bridge— Flowering Plants and 
Ferns — Buckbarrow Volcanic Crags — If England were subject to Volcanic Eruptions ? 
— Glacier Polished Rocks — A Day with Ruskin at the Weathered Rocks of Goat's 
Water — Ruskin's Confession of Faith in Christianity in " Pneterita " — Duddon Bridge 
and Duddon Sands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53 



SOxME SWISS NOTES. 

By the Lake of Neuchatel : The Caslle imd the Battle of Grandson — Yverdon — 
Education in Switzerland— Temperance — Great Storm of 1877 — Bormio — The Iron 
Gates of Cepina — Lago di Scale — Abundance of Churches and Wayside Shrines — 
Santa Caterina — Study of Alpine Scenery — Decay and Beggary at Bormio — Cretinism 77 



THE STELVIO PASS. 

History of the Great Road — Ascent on Foot — Alpine compared with English Lake 
Scenery— The Tunnels and Galleries— Hot Springs of Bormio— Dolomite— Long 
Waterfalls— The Spondalunga— Fighting in 1858— The Zigzags— Cold barren Region 
— Monte Cristallo— Fourth Cantoniere— -Summit— View over the Ortler Range — 
Sublime Scenery— Its Effect on Different Minds— Down to Trafoi— The Murderer 
Tourville — The Madatsch Glaciers by Night and by Sunrise — Ruskin on Alpine 
Scenery— The "Three Holy Springs"— The Church at Trafoi— Descent to Meran— 
Charles Dickens on Alpine Scenery 95 



J 



i 



Bolton Ubbc^ anb Moobd. 



** Straight mine eye hath caught new pleasures, 
While the landscape round it measures ; 
Russet lawns and fallows grey, 
Where the nibbling flocks do stray : 
Mountains, on whose barren breast 
The labouring clouds do often rest : 
Meadows trim with daisies pied. 
Shallow brooks and rivers wide, 
Towers and battlements it sees, 
Bo8om*d high in tufted trees." 

L*Allegro. 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 



PART I.— HISTORICAL. 

Modem Hisloiy hardly less sorrowful than Mediasval— First View of the Abbey — Wbarfedale in 
Primeval Times— Antiquity of Ihe Church of Bolton — The Tragedy of the Sitid and the 
Foundation of Bolton Priory — Wordsworth —Traces of its Early History— The Western 
Tower— " Black faced Chfford"— The Shepherd Lord— The Nut-brown Maid— Bolton 
Abbey Granled to the Cliffords of Skiplon— Disputes between the Lords of Craven— The 
Rising in the North— The While Doe of Rylstone and the Fate of the Nortons— Personal 
Habits of the Lords of Skiplon CaMle— The Castle and its Historic Portraits— The 
Buccaneering Lord— Anne Countess of Dorset and her Stale — The Countess Pillar— The 
Bolton Abbey Estates, and the House of Cavendish. 

^N the autumn of 1888 I spent part of a shoit holiday in 
visiting, for the first time, the marvellously beautiful scenery 
of that portion of Wharfedale where lie, in their emerald 
shrine, the singularly interesting ruins of Bolton Abbey. It 
has often been remarked that our fair England, abounding as 
it still does in lovely sylvan scenes, nowhere surpasses the 
peerless beauties of the Bolton woods that overhang the Wharfe on 
both its banks. Nowhere is seen such an infinite variety of manifold 
hues of foliage ; nowhere such graceful and perpetually changing dis- 
order of innumerable forms of richest splendour of woodland beauty. 

This spot of English land abounds in most interesting historical 
reminiscences. A stroll from Bolton Abbey by Barden Tower, and on 
to Rylstone Fell and the melancholy ruins of Norton Tower, leads us 
through a pi^etic land, filled with records of unspeakable grief and 
sorrow that overshadow the far-distant past ; for the pages of history 
are blotted with the tears of women and stained with the blood of 
heroes. We are often made painfully sensible how rankly conspicuous 
stand out the records of crime and misery above the lost and forgotten 
annals of a human happiness, which undoubtedly did exist in abun- 
dance ; and as we wander in peace, none molesting us, amidst these 



14 Holiday Studies. 

calm and silent woods, we rejoice with trembling that our lot is cast in 
happier days, when crime and open wickedness, let us hope, do perhaps 
bear a smaller proportion to domestic and to national happiness than in 
the mediaeval times. And yet it may be that to those who shall come 
after us, it will seem that this close of the nineteenth century was almost 
as troubled as the centuries to which these sad ruins bear such melan- 
choly testimony. 

With no other preparation than some few historical reminiscences 
out of Dr. Whitaker's old " History of Craven " and contributions from 
Wordsworth's poems, we alight from our train at the recently built 
station of Bolton Abbey, from which it is distant one mile. Our first 
glimpse of the Abbey is caught through what is graphically called the 
" Hole in the Wall " — a wide breach made long ago, one would think, 
partly with the intention to destroy, but certainly more with a view to 
the picturesque, as appropriately affording a romantic peep at a ruin 
through a ruinous gap in a high wall.* Above where now the stately 
and majestic ruin rises in mournful pomp from its setting amidst rich 
meadow-land, and encircled by groups of noble ash-trees (the solemn 
abode of hooting owls), there, about the middle of the twelfth century, 
under the earlier Plantagenets, the crystal Wharfe ran swiftly through 
wild, tangled, and disordered woods of overgrown, untended trees, 
sweeping with the steely gleam of a curving scimitar round the devious 
river reaches. An awful silence reigned, broken only by the voices of 
rolling waters, the cry of the birds, and the savage growls or yells of 
boars and wolves. There, "O sylvan Wliarfey thou wanderer through 

the woods," 

"Again I hear 
Thy waters rolling from iheir mountain springs 
With a soft inland murmur. 
And here I stand not only with the sense 
Of present pleasure, but with pleasing thoughts 
That in this moment there is life and food 
For future years." 

'* Yes ! for the time will come when the charm of shadows of old 

* It is believed that this rude gap was made, and so left, by the Rev. W. Carr, who was 
rector of Bolton Abbey from 17S9 to 1843. '^^ ^^ \!SiSXt. and judgment Bolton Abbey and 
Woods owe much of their present beauty. 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 15 

thoughts and long-lost delights shall hang like morning mist above the 
chanting waves of Wharfe and Greta." * 

Yet, although unproved by documents, there seems a strong prob- 
ability that the great Priory was not the first House of God erected 
upon this favoured spot ; for notwithstanding the silence of Domesday 
Book (which often tells us nothing where we believe it ought to speak), 
a small rude church stood here in the Anglo-Saxon period. To this 
day the parish church of Bolton Abbey, which is the nave of the 
Abbey, is called the " Saxon Cure," and, therefore, here (just as in 
the writer's church of Broughton-in-Furness, and in many other very 
ancient parish churches) divine worship has been uninterruptedly 
celebrated since times anterior to the Norman Conquest. Then 
follows a sad and romantic story, of which we decline to entertain 
historic doubts, preferring, on the whole, the testimony of tradition and 
poetry to that of mouldy and doubtful documents, or, worse still, the 
absence of them — documenta nocumenta, 

William de Meschines (that is, de Al es chiens) founded in 11 21 a priory 
church at Embsay, a few miles from Bolton, and died, leaving his 
extensive domains to his daughter, the Lady Alice de Romilly, who 
had an only son. This youth, a hardy and adventurous lad, fond 
of field sports, wandering one day (his last upon earth) at large over 
the wide uncleared forests, which formed the splendid domain of his 
house, reached, by a well-worn path, the banks of Wharfe, at that 
remarkable spot (intended to be hereafter described) where the breadth 
of the river, hemmed in between two great beds or banks of hard 
gritstone, suddenly contracts from full thirty yards to only three or 
four feet, and rushes furiously through the deep dark gorge in a 
frantic torrent, chafing with an incessant deep and solemn roar. 

Young Romilly had many a time bounded across the dangerous 
sword-like sweep of steel-black water ; but he forgot the deerhound, 
which he was still holding in the leash. The hound refused the leap ; 
the boy was suddenly checked on the opposite rock (in which the 
greatest, and almost only, real danger lies), and, staggering back, was in 

* ''Modern Painters." 



1 6 Holiday Studies. 

a moment '* in the arms of Wharfe, and strangled by a merciless force. 
For never more was young Romilly seen Till he rose a lifeless corse." 

Tradition says that the forester who witnessed this tragic scene 
returned to the bereaved and widowed mother, and, endeavouring to 
break the news gently, asked, his countenance betraying his hidden 
meaning — ^' What is good for a bootless Bene ? " " What is the remedy 
for a fruitless prayer ? " 

Divining the meaning at once, she replied, " Endless sorrow." But 
she sought consolation in works of mercy, and chiefly in raising a pious 
monument to the dear memory of her child ; and staying some scarcely- 
begun works at Embsay, selected this spot, two miles below the fatal 
Strid, where the Wharfe sweeps round in a beautiful curve, embracing 
verdant meadows on its right bank, and a rich abundance of forest 
foliage on its left. Here, in the year 1151, the lady founded on a 
fair level, taking in the rude edifice of the (probably) wooden Saxon 
church already referred to, the noble Priory of Bolton Abbey, now, 
alas ! a mere shell — a ruin, excepting the old nave, which is now the 
parish church — a ruin with just enough of it left faintly to indicate its 
ancient stateliness and majesty. Such is the tradition of the founding 
of Bolton Abbey ; and its beauty may well' plead for it some indulgence 
against the merciless criticism which finds so much pleasure in sweep- 
ing away very much that constitutes some of the principal charms of 
history. 

And the lady of Barden Tower did find solace in her pious work, for — 

** Oh I there is never sorrow of heart 
That shall lack a timely end, 
If but to God we turn and ask 
Of Him to be our friend." 

This is not the place for an accurate description of the Abbey, and 
I will only mention two or three points of salient interest, of which the 
first seems to be that Divine service has been celebrated without inter- 
mission in the nave of the abbey (which is eighty-eight feet long) 
from the first establishment of Christianity, the altar-table standing 
now in, or very near, the same spot where it has stood for probably 
ten centuries. 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 17 

. Following the ancient pious custom, the building of Bolton Priory 
began with the choir, and gradually worked westward. In cathedral 
and abbey building generally, at the crossing where the transepts 
traverse the grand and lofty sweep of the spacious line from choir 
to nave, it was always desired or intended to build a tower and spire — , 
a noble design rarely carried out for lack of local engineering skill to 
secure a sufficient foundation, and to build piers thereon able to sustain 
the ponderous tower, to say nothing of a spire upon that. At Bolton 
Abbey this architectural feat appears to have been accomplished ; but 
the performance was followed by a ruinous fall, involving the destruc- 
tion of the original twelfth-century choir and transepts, which, instead 
of now bearing evident marks (as they should) of an older date than 
the nave, show that they were actually erected a century later, proving 
that the tower must have fallen — the common fate of many a twelfth- or 
thirteenth-century tower. But as so noble a work as a cathedral or an 
abbey could not be regarded as complete without a tower, fresh ground 
was usually opened at the western extremity, and hence it happens that 
we so often find the tower adorning the west end, instead of adding 
dignity to the centre of the building. 

The western tower of Bolton Abbey was begun in 1520, but was 
never completed. Twenty years later came the suppression and the 
spoliation of the monasteries, and the building of the beautiful tower 
was stopped, in all probability never to be resumed. The thirteenth- 
century west window, which was to have been taken down, opening the 
nave and tower into one, is there still, resting against the half-finished 
tower, an instructive though far from a satisfactory lesson in English 
history. 

The Rectory, dated 1701, close to the ruins, forms an interesting 
example of the domestic architecture of the seventeenth century. 

Though here we stand on classic ground, consecrated by history, by 
romance, and by poetry, our notices must necessarily be brief; but we 
may not pass by the stories of Henry Clifford, the Shepherd Lord ; of 
Anne, Countess of Dorset and Pembroke ; and the fate of the Nortons. 

Referring in our Shakespeare to the Second Part of King Henry F/., 
we find named more than once the "deadly-handed Clifforl" "])if.ucl 



1 8 Holiday Studies. 

northern Lord Clifford of Cumberland ** (which should, however, have 
been Wiestmorland), who slew the Duke of York. In the Third Part 
hapless young Rutland, son of York, at Wakefield cries in terror, " Ah ! 
tutor, see where bloody Clifford comes," as he approached to avenge his 
father's death, and presently unarmed and defenceless the youth lay 
slain under ** blackfaced fell Clifford's sword." This dreaded warrior 
was John, seventh Lord Clifford of Skipton Castle, which had been the 
proud appanage of the Cliffords for 500 years. The young hope of the 
Yorkists was but sixteen or seventeen years old, and his murderer only 
ten years older. This accounts for the reappearance of Clifford in the 
Third Part of King Henry F/., slain near Towton in 1461, the year 
after his savage crime at Wakefield. Here he fell not on the battle- 
field, but slain by a headless arrow shot from behind a bush. 

After this battle, which was followed during the next ten years by 
four more successive defeats of the house of Lancaster, the Cliffords 
fled, their estates were confiscated, and another lord. Sir William 
Stanley, reigned in Craven in their stead. Nothing was known or 
even conjectured of the rightful lord for the next twenty-five years, 
until the first year of Henry VII. Where could he be? The widow of 
the black Clifford had married Sir Lancelot Threlkeld, a Cumberland 
Knight, but of her children by her first marriage nothing was positively 
known until the King, by reversing the attainder upon the Cliffords, 
unexpectedly unveiled the mystery ; for then there came forth from the 
wild fells of Cumberland and the lonesome glens of Skiddaw Forest, 
under the shadow of mighty Hlcncathra, a man still young, who had 
only hitherto been known as a well-conducted, rather serious-mannered, 
thoughtful shepherd, who performed his duties like a good servant, and 
sat at the lower end of the table in Hall, habited in the humble garb of 
a Cumberland shepherd. Hut it was this simple and illiterate hind who 
was the lawful mighty lord of so many strong castles and great domains 
in the north, and who had been carefully hidden away in this unfre- 
quented spot by his mother until his thirtieth year, and now was 
restored to his rightful patrimony. 

** For now another day is come, 
Fitter hope and nobler doom ; 



Bolton Abbey and Woods, 19 

He hath thrown aside his crook. 
And hath buried deep his book ; 
Armour rusting in his halls, 
On the blood of Clifford calls.'' 

Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle, 

But the blast of the trumpet failed to fire any martial ardour in 
the breast of this peaceful Clifford. His four immediate predecessors 
had all died on the field and on the bed of honour ; but 

"by Heaven's grace this Clifford's heart was framed; 
And he, long forced in humble walks to go, 
Was softened into feeling, soothed and tamed. 
Love had he found in huts where poor men lie ; 
His daily teachers had been woods and rills, 
The silence that is in the starry sky. 
The sleep that is among the lonely hills. 
In him the savage virtues of the race, 
Revenge, and all ferocious thoughts, were dead ; 
Nor did he change, but kept in lofty place 
The wisdom which adversity had bred. 
Glad were the vales and every cottage hearth ; 
The 'shepherd lord' was honoured more and more, 
And ages after he was laid in earth, 
The 'Good Lord Clifford' was the name he bore." 

The rest must be more briefly told. This contemplative shepherd lord 
withdrew to Barden Tower, the most retired of all his castles and 
towers, about three miles up the river from Bolton Abbey. Here he 
made friends with the good prior and monks, and along with them 
studied to greater advantage than he had been able to study alone on 
the Cumbrian fells the mysterious sciences of astrology and alchemy. 
Rarely did he visit London and the Court, where, however, it is recorded 
that he behaved nobly and wisely. Yet at the age of sixty the ancient 
wonted fires of the Clifford blood revived in his breast when called upon 
to resist the incursion of the Scots, and he fought unwounded at Flodden 
Field, and died in 1523 at the age of seventy. 

His later years were darkened by the misconduct of his son Henry, 
who treated his father with most unfilial disrespect. It is said that this 
Henry was the hero of the charming ballad of the " Nut-Brown Maid," 



20 Holiday Studies. 

though with no other authority than that of fair conjecture from the 

lines — 

" Nowe undyrstande, to Westmorland, 
Which is myne herytage, 
I will you brynge," etc. 

This young Henfy Clifford, with his riotous followers, robbed and 
plundered his father and many religious houses, now and then riding 
out (so his father wrote), " both himself and his horse apparelled in 
cloth of gold and goldsmiths* work, more like unto a duke than a 
poor baron's son, as he is *' — a condition of things not at all improbable 
after a demoralising civil war and in a state of imperfect civilisation. 

But it was this fine young gentleman whom " Royal Harry's " favour 
advanced to the dignity of an earl with the Garter, and enriched by 
a grant of the lands belonging to Bolton Priory — a reward, probably, 
of the tenacity with which the proud baron held out the castle of 
Skipton against the followers of Robert Aske in the Pilgrimage of 
Grace. This first Earl of Cumberland died in 1542, at the age of 
forty-nine. 

It is hardly to be expected that very quiet times should follow 
for noble lords and country gentlemen during the two following 
reigns of Henry VH. and Henry VHI. ; indeed, a peaceable life with- 
out hard knocks was not generally considered in the Tudor days to 
be an enviable lot. Usually they fell out about the deer, and also 
about the abolition of "the old religion." The Cliffords of Skipton 
Castle owned many herds of red and fallow deer, which roamed at 
large, unconfined, over those wild fells, browsing on the black crow- 
berry {Empetrum nigrum) ^ which almost covers the Yorkshire moors ; 
and they little brooked the interference of even such powerful gentry 
as the Nortons, whose land lay enclosed in the midst of the far wider 
domains of the Cliffords. The deer disdaining all natural boundaries, 
and there being no walls or fences to keep them within their own 
bounds, there would naturally arise frequent feuds and fightings 
between wrathful nobles with large armed retinues at their backs ; * 
and now and then there would be a law-suit, in one of which, accord- 
ing to the records preserved, the witness of many old " forsters " or 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 21 

* 

foresters being taken, one of these men had seen " my old Lady 
Clifford " (first wife of the Shepherd Lord) " hunt in Rilstone lordship 
and * hound ' greyhounds, and kill two fat bucks and carry them off.*' 
Many mighty huntings done in each other's despite made their pleasure 
a pretext for many a bloody conflict between these fierce barons. 

But a far more serious source of disquietude was the violent 
changing of the religion of the National Church. The forcible spolia- 
tion of all the Abbey lands and revenues, and the sudden cessation 
of accustomed religious services accompanied with a lofty and mag- 
nificent ritual, and the gradual substitution of a simpler, but (as it 
seemed to most Catholics) a meagre and unimpressive, ceremonial, 
gave great o/Tence to the Northern lords and their numerous depend- 
ents, and in 1540 the Pilgrimage of Grace (as the unhappy rising 
under Robert Aske was called) was quelled and punished with merci- 
less severity. It was just at this time that the building of the west 
tower of Bolton Abbey was stopped at the point where we now see 
it ; and soon after, no doubt, the unroofing of chancel and transepts, 
and the destruction of richly-storied window and of lordly monument, 
left the graceful structure the empty shell we now behold with such 
a strange mixture of admiration and of regret. The edifices which 
men raise endure but a few generations — a few centuries at the most ; 
but ruins last for ever, kind Nature sheltering and adorning them with 
tenderest care. 

In the twelfth year of Queen Elizabeth (in 1569), a second rising 
against the reformed faith and worship took place — a rash enterprise 
in which the venerable prior and monks of Bolton Abbey were but 
too painfully interested. The origin of the story I am about briefly 
to narrate is told in Wordsworth's lofty poem, the "White Doe of 
Rylstone ; " in " The Rising in the North," in Percy's Reliques ; and in 
Dr. Whitaker's " History of Craven." 

Something of romance has the poet woven with magic art in the 
tissue of his historic narrative ; but we shall probably not be deviating 
very far from historic truth if we follow the tale as he tells it in his 
musical lines. After the early years of the " spacious times of great 
Elizabeth," each Sunday, as the bells pealed forth from the low Abbey 



22 Holiday Studies. 

tower, the neighbouring inhabitants poured down across the pathless * 
meadows to worship in the " one protected part — a chapel like a wild 
bird's nest." There 

"They sing a service which they feel, 
For 'tis the sunrise now of zeal : 
Of a pure faith the vernal prime 
In Great Eliza's golden time." 

And while, to the murmuring voice of the flowing river, the solemn 
liturgy is proceeding, there glides in among the ruins, wandering from 
the distant fells of Rylstonc, a milk-white solitary doc. Softly she 
paces from bowered niche to prostrate tomb, and then lies still amidst 
the covert until the congregation rise to return to their homes ; and 
then she too rises, and slowly trots on her lonely way back to the 
Norton Woods. This was the famous traditional White Doe of 
Rylstone. At the date above indicated, Richard Norton of Norton 
Conyers was living, like a great country gentleman, in a strong 
tower, with spacious pleasure-grounds and terraces embosomed in 
thick forests, well stocked with game. Grey-haired, but warlike still 
and valiant, he moved with stately mien in the midst of his natural 
body-guard of eight stalwart sons, graced by the addition of one 
lovely daughter, Emily. One fatal day he received a hasty note 
from Earl Percy of Northumberland, summoning him to a desperate 
enterprise fraught with the utmost danger. Thomas Percy (seventh 
Earl of Northumberland) and the Earl of Westmorland, filled with 
discontent at the refusal of the Queen to compose the diflerences 
between herself and Mary Queen of Scots by the marriage of the 
latter with the Protestant Duke of Norfolk, and, more still, animated 
with the desire to cause 

"The rites of ancient piety 
To be triumphantly restored 
By the stern justice of the sword," 

had invited Richard Norton to join them in a rising against the Queen's 
authority. He, a staunch adherent to the old worship, permitting the 
kindling enthusiasm of religion to stifle the claims of loyalty, arose and 

* And they aic blill palhlcbb. 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 23 

called on his eight sons to join the enterprise. All obeyed the call save 

Francis, the eldest, who had embraced the newly received doctrines. 

He pleaded — 

**A just and gracious queen have we, 
A pure religion, and the claim 
Of peace on our humanity." 

Emily had wrought a splendid silken banner, on which were figured 
a cross and the five wounds of Christ — 



" Full soon to be uplifted high, 
And float in rueful company,*' 



with the banner of the Dun Bull of Westmorland and the Silver Crescent 
of Earl Percy. The rest of the story is deeply tragic. The two earls, 

" Grave gentry of estate and name, 
And captains known for worth in arms," 

through profuse hospitality, had but slender means for raising and main- 
taining an army, and Richard Norton had still less. The old Percy 
Ballad gives us a picture of Royal Elizabeth painted, we shrewdly 
suspect, to the very life ; for her Majesty's lips were but little used 
to dropping honeyed words. 

"Her Grace she turned her round abcut, 
And like a Royall Queene she swore, 
' I will ordayne them such a breakfast 
As never was in the North before.'" 

Her indignant Majesty sent northward a powerful force under the 
Earl of Sussex, Dudley, Earl of Warwick, and Lord Hunsden, which the 
ill-advised insurgents dared not stay to face in the field, but dissolved 
and scattered themselves in all directions. The customary inhuman 
cruelties followed. Vast numbers were executed by martial law with- 
out trial. The fair " North Countree " was made desolate, and the Earl 
of Northumberland fled into Scotland, was betrayed and imprisoned 
in Loch Leven Castle, and then carried again to York, where he soon 
laid his head upon the block. 

And the gallant aged lord of Norton Tower and his noble brood 
of sons, that "fair unrivalled brotherhood," they, too, mingled their 
blood, not on the battle-field, the warrior's coveted privilege, but, alas ! 



24 HouDAY Studies. 

on one and the same block. One alone, the unarmed Francis, 
pushing his way across the wilds of Craven with the consecrated banner, 
fell amidst a horde of outlaws within a day's journey of his deserted 
home, on the barren spot still called Standard Hill ; and poor desolate 
Emily was left a lonely mourner. From the time that she was laid at 
rest in the still-used God's Acre of the consecrated ruin, there her 
favourite, the white doe, paid her weekly visits on the hallowed day, 
observed, yet unmolested, and regarded with a wondering veneration by 
the peasantry of Craven. So runs the popular tradition which still sur- 
vives, its truth respected and acknowledged, a beautiful legend of an 
olden time in which such olden stories shine like lights in a dark place. 

Dr. Whitaker collects a few particulars belonging to this time of 
the personal habits and expenses of the powerful lords of Skipton and 
Bolton, out of four MS. folios dated 1606, 1634, 1637, and 1638, which 
are still carefully kept at Bolton Hall. The establishment at Skipton 
consisted of thirty-two servants, who cost about ;£^ 1,000 a year. The 
chief other expenses were for vast quantities of wine, claret, sack, and 
muscadine, spirituous liquors "not being mentioned. Tobacco was a 
heavy item, being eighteen shillings a pound Travelling was very 
expensive, the young Lord George never riding to Court with fewer 
than thirty-six gentlemen sumptuously mounted on horseback. A 
single suit of clothes for Lord Clifford would cost about ;{^200 of our 
money. Sealskin gloves and " sleeping gloves," no doubt to whiten the 
hands, are also mentioned, and a black suit of figured satin for " my 
old lord." The " wardropp " of Skipton Castle is stated in an original 
roll kept at Bolton Abbey to have been very costly and sumptuous : 
gowns of black velvet or figured satin, lined with squirrel, a crimson 
velvet kirtle with hood for a Knight of the Garter, robes of blue velvet 
with yards of blue silk and gold ribbon tied at the shoulders, to be worn 
at St. George's feast, with much more of rich apparel of. the greatest 
interest to students of the manners of the seventeenth century. Presents 
of fish, black game, and wild fowl were constantly made, for which the 
bearer received generally a gratuity of as much as the game was worth. 
Stags were sent as presents baked whole. The enormous " stagg pies " 
were flavoured with currants and lemons. Animal food was extremely 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 25 

cheap, while such luxuries as sugar " for the sack " were so expensive 
that two pounds of sugar were equal in value to a fat sheep. Having 
no newspapers, great families were supplied with news by paid 
secretaries in London, who regularly furnished their employers with 
" news-letters " at the charge of about ;^io a year. 

In the strong and ancient castle of Skipton in Craven, whose walls 
are nine to twelve feet thick, and the bases of whose seven massive 
round towers resemble the base of the Eddy stone Lighthouse, and fix 
their broad, tenacious grasp on the solid rock like the British oak — in 
this historic fortress* hangs a celebrated old family picture, representing, 
in faded colours, George, third Earl of Cumberland, fourteenth Baron 
Clifford, and thirteenth Lord of the Honor of Skipton in Craven, 
Lord Vipont, Baron Vesci, and probably owner of many titles more. 
This nobleman was one of our famous sea-kings, and served his 
sovereign gallantly in nine voyages on the high seas in American 
waters. In his other portrait (still hanging at Bolton Hall) the thin, 
spare countenance bears some appreciable resemblance to that of 
the chiefest of our sea-captains — Lord Nelson. His "fair, virtuous, 
and only lady," the Lady Margaret Russel, daughter of the second 
Earl of Bedford, stands by his side. Next in order come two sons, 
who died in early youth ; and then, separately framed, the famous 
Anne herself. Countess of Dorset, Pembroke, and Montgomery, who 
was born in Skipton Castle in 1590. By the deaths of several noble 
relatives, vast estates fell into the possession of this great lady ; and 
it must be acknowledged that she managed her large property in a 
manner becoming not only her great power and wealth, but attest- 
ing also her wisdom and the excellence of her heart. 

Thirty-eight years of family discord having been brought to a 
close in 1605 f by the death of George, third Earl of Cumberland, the 

* Now removed to Appleby. 

t "The discord especially raged after the death of Henry the first earl, when the two rival 
heiresses quarrelled and fought for their inheritance, till the King decided that they should 
divide it. The whole projierty had, I think, gone first to George's younger brother Francis, 
fourth earl, and from him to his son Henry, fifth and last earl. It was at his death that the 
heiress of the third carl claimed the whole property, and at last obtained half." — Letter from 
one of the family to the author. 



26 Holiday Studies. 

Countess Anne entered upon the inheritance of her ancestors. In her 
youth, though only a slender allowance had been made to her, she 
had devoted a fourth of it to acts of beneficence. In mature life, 
" being delivered first from a profligate and then a fanatical husband," 
she became able fully to indulge in the exercise of the pure religious 
principles she had inherited from her excellent mother, and was 
gifted with a long life, which she made illustrious by the display — 
somewhat ostentatious, perhaps — of her many virtues. According to 
the interesting notice of her life by Dr. Whitaker, " she had the 
courage and liberality of the ruder sex, and was endowed with all 
the devotion, order, and economy of her own, though, perhaps, with 
riot all its softness." 

Now free to act, she entered upon her natural element, and set 
about her great work of restoring her castles, of which six — namely, 
Skipton, Harden, Brougham, Pendragon, Brough, and Appleby — had 
been almost destroyed during the civil wars of the Commonwealth, 
and were now in ruins. Over the principal gateway of each restored 
castle she set up an inscription stating the name and rank of the 
restorer, together with the verse (Isaiah Iviii. 12), "And they that 
shall be of thee shall* build the old waste places. Thou shalt raise 
up the foundations of many generations, and thou shalt be called the 
repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in." " Removing 
from castle to castle," adds Dr. Whitaker, "she diffused happiness 
and plenty around her by consuming on the spot the produce of her 
vast domains in hospitality and charity. Her house was a school 
for the young and a retreat for the aged, an asylum for the per- 
secuted, a college for the learned, and a pattern to all." Three 
monuments, erected at her expense, attest her reverence and admira- 
tion for Daniel (her tutor in languages), for Michael Drayton, and 
for Edmund Spenser, the last being in Westminster Abbey. 

I quote, merely to dismiss summarily as probably a curious example 
of literary forgery, the famous laconic letter, once generally believed, 
and still believed by some, to have been written by her own hand to a 
Secretary of State of Charles II., who is supposed to have presumed 
to recommend to her a candidate for her borough of Appleby : — 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 27 

" I have been bullied by an usurper ; I have been neglected by a Court ; but 
I will not be dictated to by a subject. Your man shan't stand. — Ann Dorset 
Pembroke and Montgomery." 

This remarkable document was only discovered in 1753, and pub- 
lished in a periodical paper called The World, No authority was 
given as a voucher for its authenticity. The curt style is not the 
countess's, and the words " bullied " and ** stand," in the sense there 
used, had not yet come into vogue. I fear that the letter can no 
more stand than could the candidate. 

• This celebrated lady was buried at Appleby, in a splendid tomb 
erected by herself; and the inscription records that she was born 
January 30, 1590; and died March 22, 1675. She was, therefore, not 
eighty-seven years of age, as stated by Dr. Whitaker, but eighty-five. 

On the spot, between Penrith and Brough, where the great 
countess last parted with her beloved mother, she caused a com- 
memorative pillar to be raised, about twenty feet high, in the rather 
heavy and ungraceful style of the time, which, being carefully fenced 
in, is still standing uninjured, and is called the " Countess Pillar." 
On a slab of stone hard by is still annually distributed the sum of 
four pounds among the poor of the parish of Brougham, left by 
the countess for that purpose. 

The Bolton Abbey estates came into the possession of the house 
of Cavendish by marriage. Francis, fourth Earl and younger brother 
of George, third Earl of Cumberland, was father of Henry, fifth and last 
Earl, who died in 1697, leaving a daughter, the Lady Elizabeth Clifford, 
who married Lord Dungarvon, created first Earl of Burlington, whose 
daughter, the Lady Charlotte Boyle, married in 1720 the Marquis of 
Hartington, great-grandson of the Earl of Devonshire who was created 
Duke of Devonshire in 1694. By the marriage of this illustrious states- 
man (who took an active part in seating the House of Orange on the 
throne), all the estates of the wealthy Boyle family in Craven came 
into the possession of the Cavendish family. From him is descended 
William, the present and seventh Duke of Devonshire, K.G., F.R.S., 
the noble owner of Bolton Abbey, of princely Chatsworth, and of the 
more home-like, but not less beautiful, Holkcr in Cartmel. 



28 Holiday Studies. 



PART II.— DESCRIPTIVE. 

The Strid — Rev. W. Carrand the Picturesque Rustic Seats — ^The Loveliness of the Woods in 
Spring — Subdued Light for Woodland Scenery — Bardea Tower — Characteristics of Spring 
Foliage — The Mountain Ash and above-ground Roots— The Valley of Desolation — The 
Great Waterspout of 1826— Posforth Gill — Formation of Mountain Streams —Heber's Ghyll 
— Weathering of Rocks — Bolton Abbey Churchyard — Nature the Beautifier of Ruin and 
Decay — Lord Frederick Cavendish — ^The Good Time that w///come, "though it tarry." 

May 27, 1889. — After spending a Sunday in the hospitable old 
Rectory, and having taken part in the services of the noble church which 
now fills all the western half of Bolton Abbey, I find myself at this 
moment sitting on a rounded slab of gritstone by the far-famed Strid. 
Here the Wharfe, which, says Ruskin, ** never could Turner revisit 
without tears," after having wound its devious way for many miles 
amongst scenes of that indescribable sylvan and pastoral beauty which 
is produced by the combination of either moving or sleeping waters with 
bold and shattered rock, or of green and grassy glades with masses of 
perpetually varying moorland light and shade, is pent in by huge masses 
of the hardest rock he has yet pierced in his whole course ; and after 
enjoying his freedom in a breadth of some thirty yards, he has had to 
force a narrow passage of from ten to only a couple of yards, or even of 
four feet six, in width. To push the whole of his liquid body through 
this narrow gorge, when not in flood, costs him a world of pain, and puts 
him in a great fury, and here he has chafed and roared incessantly for 
millenniums without succeeding in making for himself a more conve- 
nient passage. 

Here at my feet, after having tumbled over the slight first fall, and 
scampered down the rapid slopes, he is now rushing with a deep bass 
roaring. The greenish, clear brown stream is rippled and corrugated 
as if corded with swollen muscles, and is crested with a pale yellowish 
foam. No cliffs confine the narrow chasm, but the huge, smoothly 
rounded slabs of the mossy rocks glisten and glow with the bright sheen 
of the emerald and the topaz. The river to-day is unusually shallow, yet 
the noise and battle-din of the rushing waters are endless. The rock 
where I am sitting, ten feet above the usual level of the water, has 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 29 

evidently been covered not long ago by the swollen river to a depth 
equal to ten feet higher than my seat Curiously shaped circular 
hollows, called pot-holes, in parts of the gritstone of less hardness, have 
been by slow degrees scooped out of the tough rock, that almost defies 
the chisel, the axe, and the hammer. Lying at the bottom of the pots, 
which are from three to even eight feet deep, you may see the round ' 
boulders and the smooth pebbles whose perpetual grinding and eddy- 
ing round and round has slowly elaborated these singular holes. 
Similar pot-holes exist on a much larger scale in the famous so-called 
glacier garden at Lucerne, with the polished globular boulders, the size 
of a man's head, still lying at the bottom of them. 

At the striding place where young Romilly met his fate, the opposing 
rocks approach each other within a space of four feet six or five feet. 
Here the water for ever roars past with a terrible violence almost 
resembling the sweep of a sabre wielded by some mighty arm. Few 
venture across, nor is there any inducement to cross except the display 
of a sure foot and a steady eye. The two stepping places by which the 
Strid is rather rashly stridden over are easily discerned by the worn 
appearance of the stone. They do not look inviting, nor do even the 
life buoys and the long pole hanging near at hand suggest reassuring 
ideas. The step or stride across must be nicely calculated. Too far is 
even more dangerous than a little short. 

I change my seat. The lord of these pleasant woods has, for the 
pleasure and refreshment of numerous visitors, placed a seat at every 
spot where some fresh and lovely prospect opens out, and, therefore, 
the charming rustic resting places are very numerous. Wherever you 
find a seat, there you may be sure is a view of more than usual 
attractiveness. From this spot I see far below me the curving river 
winding through the green-wood in form like a silver bow with its 
convex at my feet. To my right it is still wide. To the left it has 
begun to contract itself into a narrower bed, and is beginning to fume 
and fret at the prospect of immediate incarceration. The reaches of the 
river in all directions are bordered by trees, bending gracefully and 
dipping down their foliage to the very water's edge ; not great, park- 
like trees, but sycamores, ash, beech, elm, and holly. The oaks at 



30 Holiday Studies. 

Bolton are not of great size, except one by the road-side near the 
station, called " Queen Elizabeth." 

All arc now gay and glittering in all the glory of their May attire, 
where spring and summer meet: while the rich undergrowth, especially 
on the opposite or Harden side, is delicately tinted in many places with 
what looks like wreaths of light blue vapour, with a near resemblance to 
light clouds of peat smoke wafted by a gentle wind, but consists in 
reality of great beds of blue hyacinths in their thousands, while here 
and there one might be picked out of purest white, and admirably 
contrasted in places with rosy clouds of red campions. Elsewhere 
it is the forget-me-nots in a faint blue mist which seem to throw a 
pale reflection of the heavens beneath the heavy foliage of the trees. 
There again arc sweet beds of woodruff, and other beds equally like 
the stars of heaven for number and for sheen, though far from sweet 
to the scent, of the Allium ursinum^ or garlic. And there are modest- 
looking water-avens meekly bowing down their heads of ruddy velvet. 
Above, below, before, behind, I seem to see the blessing of God upon 
His creatures irradiating the ample face of universal nature, insomuch 
that " they laugh for joy, they also sing," and one understands the 
fervent poetry of the sweet psalmist of Israel, in whose eyes "the 
mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs." What 
beautiful and pleasant places has the God of love provided on this 
earth, which fallen man has so desecrated ! 

Though the day is none of the brightest and the sky somewhat 
threatening, it docs not matter ; so much the better. English woodland 
scenery being so exceedingly rich and luxuriant, is none the worse for 
being viewed under a mild, subdued light, which brings out the contrasts 
and the harmonies of colour and shade better than a bright and garish 
sunshine. 

Once more I change my position. I am now on the Harden or 
right bank of the river, at a fair elevation, but not yet out of the 
wood. We sit in an arbour, rudely and strongly built of oak, command- 
ing a distant view of the ruins of Harden Tower, rising from among the 
woods, the chosen residence of the "good Lord Clifford," and of his 
descendant the great countess Ann, whose tiny little clogs (probably 



Bolton Abbey and Woods, 31 

worn in her girlhood) I have just been shown at the hall, together 
with a straw bonnet of the Duchess of Devonshire,* not at all 
like the famous Gainsborough. A portrait of the countess, in 
the same house, shows her, by her firm and compressed lips, to 
have certainly been a stern woman, accustomed to command, who 
would be able to say, with unanswerable energy, '* Your man shan't 
stand 1 " Harden Tower has fallen into ruins, not by the brunt of war, 
but simply by disuse and neglect, and by having been long abused as a 
handy quarry of ready-hewn stones, and a wood-house for firewood and 
shaped timber by neighbouring builders — a felonious act overlooked 
then, but never permitted now. This arbour, like every other seat 
(placed by a former rector, the good William Carr, by the permission of 
the Duke), commands also a magnificent reach of the river, where I can 
see the trout, and his cousin the grayling, leaping together. And I see 
beneath me and before me, across the river, the soft and tender golden- 
greens of the budding oak, and the bluish shade of the full-leaved 
sycamore, and the still half-naked, upturned ends of the ash-boughs, 
all refreshed and shining like jewels in the sun after the small and 
gentle rain, which has been fallin;^ with little intermission. f 

Lower down we meet with a curiosity. A tall and slender young 
mountain-ash rises straight up from the centre of the rounded top of a 
mossy boulder, which it clasps with four claws, which root into the soil 
and furnish the tree with a fourfold root above ground. This is a great 
and inexplicable puzzle. The bark has been much disfigured by names 
cut into it, but is now protected by a stout paling. 

. May 29. — The long and winding gill called " The Valley of Desola- 
tion " supplies the combination which is often felt welcome after beauty 
in too great profusion. The effect is the same as that of the timely and 
artful discord sometimes introduced to give prominence to the har- 
monies of a finished composition. Browning (adopting, perhaps, the 
idea of Wagner) asks, ** Why rushed the discord in, but that harmony 
should be praised ? " 

In the year 1826 a fearful storm raged over the valley of the 

* This is the story as it is told by the housekeeper, but unauthorised by the family, 
t The annual rainfall here is only 29 inches. 



32 HouDAY Studies. 

Wharfe, and a great waterspout travelled slowly down the Posforth 
Gill, accompanied with thunder and lightning, twisting and wrenching 
huge branches off the oaks, and in some cases entirely stripping a 
mighty monarch of the forest, and leaving nothing but a gaunt and 
blackened carcase standing. The ravages of that great storm are still 
apparent in the strange sight of a number of what were once stalwart 
trees in the path of the destroyer, and now are struggling between life 
and death. The whole moor is bleak and inhospitable in the extreme, 
except down in the gill, where the stream (which has at times raged 
with the utmost fury) is now at least, with its beautiful waterfall, a scene 
of the greatest woodland beauty. Not many people there seem to be 
able to account for the existence in one spot of such a number of 
blackened, blasted trees, so soon does the memory of a remarkable 
event in some cases pass away. The cause I have -described is that 
stated by the noble owner, who has many undoubted claims besides 
his scientific knowledge to be an authority. 

All down the gill vast blocks of boulders lie about in confusion. It 
might be thought that so insignificant a stream as this, and much more 
that of Heber's Ghyll, near Ilkley, would be totally inadequate to pro- 
duce such results. But once or twice in a century comes a tremendous 
storm, when huge stones are rolled down off the moors, and hurled 
further down by the powerful torrents, to be deposited in the swollen 
and expanded bed of the stream. Intense frosts and more destructive 
thaws, occurring at distant intervals, break up ponderous pillars of stone 
into slabs, and split them up with incredible force ; and I happen just 
recently to have noticed in my own parish a bare flat surface of slaty 
rock, four feet across, freshly trisected by some force, which could only 
have been that of frost. 

Again, a thin and rapid mountain rill passing, in various moods^ 
over a sloping nioorland surface (as at Heber's Ghyll) will, in the 
process of the ages, wear down the hardest millstone-grit, dividing it 
into vast blocks, which have all the appearance of having been swept 
down from above by some irresistible torrent, but have, in fact, lain 
there in the same spot, to be slowly carved out into those shapeless 
blocks, which have been knocked about and hurled against each other 



Bolton Abbey and Woods. 33 

in great floods, but not transported to any distance. Kind, artistic, pic- 
turesque Nature covers the more sheltered blocks with moss and ferns, 
and borders the stream with water-loving shrubs and trees ; and so we 
get most of our beautiful ravines and mountain gills. 

Such processes are repeated century after century during geological 
ages, to which historic periods are as nothing. The mere chemical 
effect of the atmospheric weathering on fixed rocks assists in working 
out these varying aspects of nature ; and these slow and sure, these rare 
and remote changes, account for much, if not all, of the strange com- 
bination of craggy and woodland scenery which constitutes the principal 
charm of the valley of the Wharfe and of the Yorkshire moors. 

Thus have we wandered on from one beautiful, interesting scena to 
another, consecrated some to the sylvan pride of sweet and rural 
loveliness which enshrines in an aureole of glory so many of the stately 
ancestral homes of England, and some to scenes rendered memorable by 
the piety of our forefathers, or the valour and the worth of the ancestors 
of our old English aristocracy. 

Can we more fitly conclude our pilgrimage than on the ancient 
hallowed soil where the feet of so many generations have trod in silent 
reverence over the ashes of the dead from Alfred to Victoria ? 

• Where Art and Science fail, the loving God of Nature interposes 
and spreads a tender beauty over the ruined works of men. The dry 
stone fences, the crumbling mortared wall, are in time overspread with 
the delicate drapery of the wall-pellitory, the golden bloom of the 
wallflower, the snapdragon, the pink, and scores more of the native 
vestments which are everywhere provided to adorn decay and conceal 
ruin. Soft green cushions of moss display their full and graceful curves 
on dry stone fences, and jsilver-grey lichens and red or orange mould 
invest the rocks and the boulders, as well as the ancient standing walls, 
with a venerable glory, of which only the absence can enable us to 
understand all the loveliness. 

Here in the consecrated pile which crowns the scene with its silent, 
solemn. grandeur, here within hearing of the rushing of the water through 
the far-famed stepping-stones, here where the noiseless feet of the milk- 
white doe padded on the hallowed turf, the Romillys, the Cliffords, 

c 



34 Holiday Studies. 

the Nortons, and the Cavendishes have worshipped from generation to 
generation ; and here rest in peace until the coming of the Son of Man 
in glory the mortal remains of friar and monk, of prince and peasant 

And here in this sweet and most peaceful spot, where sternness and 
power blend with the sweet peace of tender decay, here for ages and 
generations to come will the moistened eye dwell with deep and 
reverent emotion on the solemnly beautiful memorial of one dis- 
tinguished amongst so many of the loved and honoured. We are 
gazing upon the memorial, a lovely white runic cross, raised here in 
the Dale of Wharfe, to one whose mortal remains lie resting in peace at 
Edensor, hard by the princely palace of the Peak. To Lord Frederick 
Cavendish, the beloved son of the noble Duke whose honoured life is 
still prolonged among us, stands nobly lifting up its head to the height 
of seventeen feet among the humbler memorials of the dalesmpn, a pure 
white free-stone runic cross with the following inscription : — 

** To the beloved memory of Lord Frederick Charles Cavendish, son of William, 
7th Duke of Devonshire, and of Blanche Georgiana, his wife. Born November 30th, 
1836. He went out as Chief Secretary to Ireland, *Full of love to that country, full 
of hope for her future, full of capacity to render her service,' and was murdered in 
the Phoenix Park, Dublin, within twelve hours of his arrival, May 6th, 1882. * The 
Lord grant thee thy heart's desire, and fulfil all thy mind.' " 

Another memorial, a bronze statue, at Barrow-^in-Furness, bears the 
following lines : — 

** Love thyself last ; cherish those hearts that hate thee, 
'* Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace 
"To silence envious tongues. Be just and fear not. 
'*Lct all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's, 
" Thy God's, and truth's. Then if thou fall'st 
"Thou fall'st a blessed martyr." 

In Edensor churchyard Lord Frederick was interred in a grave of 
the utmost simplicity. On a beautiful tablet in the church after the 
name and dates is inscribed — 

" Blessed are the peace makers : for they shall be called the children of God." 
" Blessed are the pure in heart : for they shall see God." 



Bolton Abbey and Woods, 35 

And on the fine table tomb in Cartmel Priory Church, under the re- 
cumbent figure in white marble, are the words : — 

" Died in the service of his country and the defence of his friend." 

" Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord ? or who shall stand in His Holy 
Place ? He that hath clean hands and a pure heart." 

Many of the house of Cavendish have given the service or the 
sacrifice of their lives to their King, their country, and their God. Many 
have fallen nobly, covered with all the glory that earth can give. To ^ 
Frederick Cavendish belongs as high and worthy a distinction as any 
that the best and noblest of the court and camp of Queen Victoria's 
reign can desire, the glory of having fallen a herald of peace, the 
defender of his land against disorder and sedition, the noble champion 
and forerunner of a happier time that is yet to come, and will come. 
•* For the vision is yet for the appointed time, and it hasteth toward the 
end, and shall not lie. Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely 
come, it will not delay." 



1889. 



Mor^0wortb'0 ** Me0tmorlan& (Birl." 



wordsworth's "westmorland 
Girl." 

Broughton-in-Fumess and ihe Duddon— Sarah Mackeieth, "The Weslmorland Girl"— Her 
Beauty and Refinement— Fading Away— Unexpected Discovery that she was Wordsworth's 
Heroine, liis "Lamb Dclivcier" — Story of the Ueliverancc of the Lamb from Drovining — 
The Scene by Grasmere Lake— Primilive Times at Grasmcre— Sarah Tolling the Passing 
Bell — Sarah "loved nil things great and small" — Nuthaoicl Hawthorne at Grasmere — 
Passing away — Visited by Angels— Laid at rest in Broughton Churchyard — Human Interest 
needed for Ihe True Enjoyment of Beautiful Scenery. 

fBOUT the month of February, 1872, I received information 
that a woman in my parish of the humbler class was in 
a very weak and suffering state. The distance from the 
vicarage was but five minutes' walk, and I was soon in her 
neat little cottage. Sarah Davies was but a new-comer into 
the parish. Her husband had obtained agricultural employ- 
ment, and he and his wife and two little girls had been settled but a 
few weeks in a cottage commanding a lovely view, bordering on 
the Lake country, if not actually part of it. The cottage stood on 
a gentle elevation. Beneath lay the wide and level estuary of the 
Duddon, which here spreads into the broad expanse known as the 
Duddon Sands. Northward appears the opening between the two 
rocky fells of Bleansley Bank and Stoneside into the richly-wooded, 
verdure-clad valley of the Duddon, our great poet's " Duddon, long-loved 
Duddon, child of the clouds," To the right, nestling and embosomed 
between low hills, lies, compact and close, the little whitewashed and 
slate-roofed town of Broughton-in-Furness, with its quaint old church — 
some of it older than Fumess Abbey— standing amidst green meadows 
apart from the town, and the single line of railway sweeping past, till 
lost in the deep rock cutting, which is crowned by the ancient battle- 
ments of Broughton Tower. That noble mountain, Black Combe, 
rises conspicuously before us over the Duddon Sands at no greater 
distance than six or seven miles, its gentle slopes and long, sweeping 



40 



HouDAV Studies. 



sides contrasting finely witJi the dark and rugged hollow that descends ^ 
— steep, fro^vning, and inaccessible — from its majestic summit, and from j 
which it appears to derive its name of Black Combe,* which connects it ] 
with the Welsh Cwms. Another huge mountain mass rises almost in 
the same line with IJlack Combe, at a distance from it of some twelve | 




RVDAt, MOUNT. 



or thirteen miles in the south-west, Broughton lying nearly between the 
two. This is Coniston Old Man, with its brother heights, the Dow 
Crags and Walna Scar, or White Pike. The view is bounded at the 
farthesi south by the sea, and by the pufting chimney-stalks of Barrow 
and Askam, and the busy furnaces of Millom, where Hodbarrow fuses 
its mineral wealth; to the north, with a fine contrast, Sarah might daily 
fix her eyes, with a last lingering, fond gaze, upon her native mountains 
of Ryda! Head, Fairfield, and Kirkstonc, rising pale blue in the distance 



Wordsworth's *' Westmorland Girl'' 41 

from between the heights that encircle lovely Coniston and Winder- 
mere. But external nature, with all her charms, can only occupy the 
mind in its leisure hours of quiet peace and meditation. The visitor of 
the sick leaves these thoughts at the door when he enters the sick 
chamber. 

Sarah was a rather tall woman, past her thirty-seventh year, possess- 
ing features of singular delicacy and refinement — quite enough, indeed, 
to entitle her to be described as beautiful — even very beautiful. Dark 
hair of raven blackness, always smoothed and parted with the most 
perfect neatness, shaded a face now transparently thin, pale, and deli- 
cate, but once evidently bright with joy and love and animation ; eyes 
deep and dark, with all a wife*s and a mother^s beaming softness when 
she spoke of those who were so dear to her, and from whom she knew 
well she would soon be called to part for this life. I cannot resist 
speaking of the singular beauty and refinement of that countenance, 
chiefly because it reflected the purity and the charity of the heart 
within. 

I generally found her lying, in her snow-white garments, in a room 
where all was of the same snowy whiteness in its perfect cleanliness. 
Fair flowers stood in the window ; the air of the room was always sweet 
and pure. Consumption was rapidly wasting her frame away ; and a 
babe was born of her who seemed as if her own life was to be counted 
by days rather than by weeks. But the quiet confidence of her soul in 
the peace that trust in Jesus alone can give was never once disturbed 
during her long and severe trial. In her wonderful calmness and 
patience she yet asked, ** Was she patient } " " Did we think she was 
impatient ? " No, indeed ; it was evident that Jesus was her stay in the 
darkest hour. 

How full of the truest hope and consolation is this knowledge, 
which we gain from experience of the death-beds of those who die in 
the Lord, that when earth is fading away, its ties loosening day by day, 
and weakness prostrates the body wholly and the mind in part, yet t/ien 
is felt, with a reality which nothing earthly can equal, that God is sup- 
porting our failing strength ; that He gives us to sec what mortal eyes 
in the bustle and business of life can only faintly discern ; that the 



42 Holiday Studies. 

Redeemer then seems to be whispering to our innermost heart : " Fear 
not, for I am with thee ; I have called thee by thy name ; thou art 
Mine. When thou passest through the waters, I v/ill be with thee ; and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walkest 
through the fire, thou shalt not be burned ; neither shall the flame 
kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of 
Israel, thy Saviour." 

Of my interviews with Sarah I have no long and interesting con- 
versations to record. It is very rarely, if ever, that in cottage life one 
meets with piety that is able to express its feelings in many words. 
For the most part, our intercourse consisted of quiet conversations, in 
which I bore, indeed, the principal part, but for which she supplied the 
matter by words, few but full of feeling. Especially, she would fre- 
quently assure me of her happiness in leaving all to her Heavenly 
Father, and her dark eyes would then light up with a more than earthly 
radiance. 

Once we were talking of Grasmere, her native place, when, turning 
her head quickly towards me, she said, " Did you know Mr. Words- 
worth, sir ? " I told her that I had only seen him two or three times, 
but had never spoken to him, and was not acquainted with him. " I 
knew him very well, sir," she added ; " he was a very nice and kind old 
gentleman, with white hair, and he used to pat me on the head. He 
wrote a poem about me." ** Indeed," said I ; " and what is the poem 
called ? " " It is called * The Westmorland Girl/ " she replied, " and it 
was about my getting a lamb out of a beck." And, as she spoke, her 
pale, delicate features lighted up with enthusiasm at the remembrance. 

There had been a heavy fall of rain, she said ; the streams were 
greatly swollen. A distressed and forsaken lamb had been left on one 
side of this dividing torrent by its mother, which had strayed away 
across it Trying to follow, it had fallen in, and immediately the 
hungry waves whirled the poor creature away, and tumbling it over 
loose stones, and tossing it from bank to bank, would soon have carried 
it, drowned, into the lake had not little Sarah Mackereth, then only nine 
years old, plunged boldly in and caught the poor lamb in her little 
arms. "We were rolled over and over," said she (suiting the action 



to the wofd by making her arms to revolve rapidly round each other"^ ; 
** but I got it safely out at lasL* I asked her if she was not frightened 
and hurt ; but she laughed in her quiet, checffiil vay, and said, *" Not 
at all ; and my clothes were soon dry again.* 

The poem in whidi Wordsworth commemorated this act is not so 
well known as many others <^ the poet's works. It was one of his 
latest productions, when man}* collected editions of his works had 
already been published, and is found in Moxon s Popular Edition 

(1869) :- 

^ Let vho win ddight in (able, 
I shall tdl vou truth. A lamb 
Leapt from this steep bank to foUow 
'Cross the brook its thoughtless dam. 

" Far and wide, on hill and valley. 
Rain had £dlen, unceasing rain. 
And the bleating mother's young one 
Struggled with the flood in \'ain : 

^'But, as chanced, a cottage maiden 
(Ten years scarcely had she told) 
Seeing, plunged into the torrent. 
Clasped the lamb and kept her hold. 



C( 



Whirled adown the rocky channel. 
Sinking, rising, on they go. 

Peace and rest, as seems, before them 
Only in the lake below. 



" Oh ! it was a frightful current 

Whose fierce wrath the girl had braved ; 
Clap your hands with joy, my hearers, 
Shout in triumph ; both are saved." 



A few days ago I visited the scene of this courageous deed. The 
Mackereths' cottage is called the Wyke Cottage ; it stands on the north 
side of the road that leads from Grasmere to Langdale, about half a 
mile from the church. It is a very small, stone-built cottage, with one 
of those round chimneys which form such a pretty feature of the houses 
in that district. A tall yew and a Scotch fir rise very high above it. 



44 Holiday Studies, 

Behind rise the shining steeps of Silver How, from which, down a rocky 
fell, rich in underwood and ferns and flowers, rushes the noisy and 
impetuous torrent which had so nearly carried into the lake our little 
Westmorland maiden. The stream is not wide, but, when full, it is 
deep, and full of rugged boulders. Here dwelt the Mackereths — parish 
clerks for some gi nerations ; but, at an earlier period, one or more of 
them were " priests." This is the name still given to the clergyman in 
these parts by most of the old people ; it is doubtless a relic of pre- 
Reformation times. In those earlier days, in the Lake district, when a 
vacancy fell in a living, a successor was not fetched from some unknown 
distance ; some grave and clerkly man from the same dale would serve 
their turn, who laboured both as minister and schoolmaster, perhaps all 
in one building — the parish church. Such was the origin of Robert 
Walker, so well known as ** Wonderful Walker,"* for sixty years minister 
of Seathwaite Chapel and parish schoolmaster, and very frequently a 
day-labourer, working for hire for his own parishioners. He was born 
in the little cottage-farm of Undercrag, in his own Seathwaite, which is 
the next parish to the north of this parish of Broughton-in-Furness. 
It has been remarked to me, by those who have long known them, that 
there has always been a certain refinement, a superior nature, that has 
distinguished the members of the Mackereth family. They may be 
truly called " the gentry of the soil " — noble examples of simple and 
pure native excellence, owing little to education, little to intercourse 
with those who move in the higher ranks of life. They retain the rustic 
simplicity, they practise the untutored and artless courtesy which we 
love to imagine, but do not often discover, in the English peasant life. 

Little Sarah early lost her mother. To her worthy father she was 
most devoted. Her love for him was deep and intense. No labour was 
too great to lighten her dear father's toils, or relieve him from attend- 
ance upon such of his duties as she was able to fulfil. Thus, many a 
time she tolled the church bell for her father ; and, at the request of an 
aged gentleman of Grasmere, after his death she tolled the passing bell 
every day for him until his body was committed to the grave. This 
was a service in excess of what he had asked, for he had only requested 

* See the next paper, "Wordsworth and the Duddon." 



Wordsworth's ''Westmorland Girl'' 45 

her to toll the bell on the day of his funeral ; but her zeal led her to 
do more. This circumstance is referred to ia the second part of 
the poem. 

One other occurrence is mentioned. So great was her feeling for all 
living creatures, that she would never endure to see them made to suffer 
unnecessarily. A gentleman was fishing in Grasmere Lake. Our little 
maiden stood by watching or helping. He does not seem to have 
gained her confidence, for, having caught a large pike, and cruelly 
thrusting a stick repeatedly down its throat with a wicked pleasure in 
its writhing and agony, the brave little creature, with indignation kind- 
ling in her lovely countenance, snatched it from him, and flung it far 
away into the lake, fearless of his anger, careless of the consequences. 

These little traits of character, the historical accuracy of which I 
vouch for on the authority of those who knew and loved well the bard 
and his " little lamb-deliverer,'* are embodied in the second part of the 
poem, of which the following are the concluding verses : — 

" Listen yet awhile ; — with patience 
Hear the homely truths I tell ; 
She in Grasmere's old church steeple 
Tolled this day the passing bell. 

"Yes, the wild girl of 'the mountains 
To their echoes gave the sound, 
Notice punctual as the minute, 
Warning solemn and profound. 

"She, fulfilling her sire's office. 

Rang alone the far-heard knell — 
Tribute, by her hand, in sorrow, 
Paid to one who loved her well. 

"When his spirit was departed. 
On that service she went forth ; 
Nor will fail the like to render 
When his corse is laid in earth. 

"What then wants the child to temper 
In her breast unruly fire, 
To control the froward impulse. 
And restrain the vague desire? 



46 Holiday Studies. 

''Early a pious training, 

And a steadfast outward power, 
Would supplant the weeds, and cherish 
In their stead each opening flower. 

"Thus the fearless lamb-deliverer, 
Woman -grown, meek-hearted, sage. 
May become a blest example 
For her sex of every age. 

"Watchful as a wheeling eagle, 
Constant as a soaring lark, 
Should the country need a heroine. 
She might prove our Maid of Arc. 

" Leave that thought ; and here be uttered 
Prayer that grace Divine may raise 
Her humane, courageous spirit 
Up to heaven, through peaceful ways." 

In Nathaniel Hawthorne's "English Note-Book" we find that he 
met at Grasmere Church with one of the Mackereths, and heard about 
the poem without being able to call the circumstances of it to mind. I 
do not doubt that if he had known more about it, we should have some 
entertaining gossip on the subject. The following is his account in 

1855:— 

" I have been again to see Wordsworth's grave, and, finding the 
door of the church open, we went in. A woman and little girl were 
sweeping at the farther end, and the woman came towards us out of the 
cloud of dust which she had raised. . . . She was a very intelligent- 
looking person, not of the usual English ruddiness, but rather thin and 
somewhat pale, though bright of aspect Her way of talking was very 
agreeable. She inquired if we wished to see Wordsworth's monument, 
and at once showed it to us — a slab of white marble fixed against the 
upper end of the centre row of stone arches, with a pretty long inscrip- 
tion, and a profile bust, in bas-relief, of his aged countenance. . . . 
The woman said that she had known him very well, and that he had 
made some verses on a sister of hers. She repeated the first lines — 
something about a lamb — but neither S nor I remembered them." 

I read the poem to her and her husband one calm summer evening. 



WoRDSWORjifs ''Westmorland Girl'' 47 

He had never heard it ; she, I think, not more than once. Her placid 
gaze rested on her husband's countenance, to see how it would affect 
him ; for she loved him faithfully. He was " not one of those rough, 
wicked men," she once said to me. 

I feel the more pleasure in bringing this touching poem before 
a wider circle of thoughtful readers, because it furnishes, as I think, 
an illustration of a fact grateful to the Christian — that Wordsworth, 
in the latter years of his calm, happy, and peaceful life, enjoyed more 
deeply than in early and middle life the blessedness and peace of a 
closer walk with God. Witness, for instance, the solemn stillness and 
the deep faith in all Divine things that breathes through the " Evening 
Voluntaries." Not that at any time his faith and confidence were 
in any danger of becoming loosed from their moorings, but that in him 
peculiarly the mellowing flow of years brought with it a surer trust, 
a deeper realisation of the blessedness of a soul at peace with God, 
through the Redeemer's merits ; so that his peaceful old age was 
like to what we sometimes witness in the lovely evenings which shed 
such a richness of glory over his beloved vales — a sunset without 
a cloud. 

Such, too, was Sarah Davies's departure. The difference between 
her entrance upon a better world and his consisted in nothing more 
than the mere power of expression. In her, no less than in the poet, 
there was patience under suffering, mingled with joy at the prospect 
of release from the flesh and heaven opening. Both knew and felt 
equally the noble declaration of faith and immortality : " When Thou 
hadst overcome the sharpness of death. Thou didst open the kingdom 
of heaven to all believers." But poor Sarah could only look her 
firm belief with her eyes, and express it in words few and simple, 
though strong with all the fulness of her heart. 

Before me hangs still the set of hymns for the sick and suffer- 
ing which I had hung by her bedside, and every day the hymn for 
that day was placed before her. It lies open at xxix., and she died 
on the 1st September. She read them, therefore, up to the last day 
that she was able. Great comfort did she receive from these well- 
chosen hymns. 



48 Holiday Studies. 

She received at my hands the Holy Communion, with her hus- 
band. There was in her countenance a sweet and holy calm that 
recalled none of her early animation. It was the rich, deep glow 
of heavenly light that kindles in the face of the true believer, and 
marks unmistakably to the minister of God that here is one sealed 
for heaven, saved and redeemed from the power of the grave. What 
proved to be my last interview with this dear child of God, I did 
not think would be my last. Some clerical business took me to 
Carlisle, and in my absence she passed gently away — the gentle, 
loving spirit returned to Him that gave it. 

On her last day upon earth her sister entered the room. Sarah 
said, "Did Davies tell you?" "Tell me what?" "Did he really 
not tell you? It is very strange. Well, I have seen angels. They 
came to fetch me. I saw them plainly ; I could not be mistaken." 
Blessed spirit of the departed, thou knowest now whether it were 
indeed a vision from heaven ! 

Sarah sleeps in the quiet churchyard of Broughton-in-Furness. 
The mountains of her native land look down from afar upon her 
resting-place ; the distant murmur of Duddon may often be heard 
in deeper contrast to the stillness of the scene. The prayer of the 
Christian poet has been heard. His spirit seemed to her minister 
to mingle with his own as he bent over her fair but fading counten- 
ance in fervent prayer and thanksgiving. The wayward but brave 
and loving girl had grown to womanhood. The country had not 
called to her for aid, or she would not have been wanting at its 
call. No Joan of Arc was she, but one whom it was always a joy 
and a comfort to see — a crown to her husband, the glory of her 
children. " Her children shall arise and call her blessed ; her hus- 
band also, and he praiseth her." 

Tourists will flock still to Grasmcre to stay, or to pass that fairest 
gem of English scenery, and be delighted, as every one must be who 
has the faintest touch of a feeling of love and admiration for the 
lovely creation of God ; and many, starting in their walk, with elastic 
tread and chest expanding with the conscious glow of strength and 
spirits, for Elterwater, Langdale, or Coniston, will leave behind that 



Words woRTi/s " Westawrland GiriJ* 49 

humblest little cottage sheltered at the foot of Silver How; and will 
they not now, perhaps, bestow a passing thought on the child that dwelt 
in that lowly cot, whose grace and courage won for her a prouder and 
more lasting distinction far than could have been conferred by medals 
and ribands ? After all, there is nothing like a little human interest 
to impart an added charm to natural scenery. You pass through 
Grasmere, Rydal, Ambleside, and you speak to none but landlords and 
landladies, waiters and chambermaids, and you lose the first element 
that brings you akin to the place and attaches you to it lastingly. 
It is not in these sweet vales as in the islands of the south, where 
the " spicy breezes blow," — 

" Where every prospect pleases, 
And only man is vile." 

Although our dalespeople may not now be distinguished by all the 
primitive simplicity in which the first educated and polished settlers 
found them some seventy years ago, yet there is still, for all who love 
quiet and simple worth, abundance of the true metal still to reward him 
who seeks for it in the spirit of " charity out of a pure heart." 

1872. 



D 



Morbawortb anb tbe Bubbon. 



Wordsworth and the.Duddon. 

Duddon Sonnels — A Two Days' solitary Vbit lo the Duddon Valley in September, iSSi — 
Seathwaite Tarn — Birks Bri^ and Gowdrel Dub — Glittering Transparency of the Water — 
Cockley Ikck- Division of the Valley— Hard knot and Wrynose— Wild Deet— Three Shire 
Stones— Source of the Duddon — Dioptrics of a ninning Brook — Varieties of Effects in a 
Mountainous Country — Coming down to Che Postures and the Farms — Seathwalle Church 
—Rev. Robert Walker "The Wonderful "—Original Information— Stepping- Stones— 
Waltabarrow Crag— The Red Felsite Dike— Ulpha Kirk— Dunnerdale Feils— Duddon 
Woods— Duddon Hall— Rowfold Bridge— Flowering Plants and Ferns — Buckbarrotr 
Volcanic Crags — If England were subject to Volcanic Eruptions? — Glacier Polished 
Rocks— A Day with Ruskin at the Weathered Rocks of Goat's Water— Rusk io's Con- 
fession of Faith in Christianity in " Pneterita" — Duddon Bridge and Duddon Sands. 

^gged, shattered, and confused mass of 
rock crowning the high ridge that overlooks Birks Farm 
and Birks Bridge, the rich hues of advancing autumn 
throwing golden reflections upon the green patches of 
verdure that spread a glory over fell and valley, I here command 
I first view of the glowing scenery of the "Duddon Sonnets," 
consecrated by the genius of Wordsworth, one of the three or four truly 
great poets to whom England has given birth. 

Here I, have chosen to commence my lonely contemplative visit to 
the higher Duddon Valley, descending into it exactly opposite the point 
from which Wordsworth himself recommended an entrance into the 
valley as the loveliest of all, at the descent from Seathwaite Tarn. 

From my elevated vantage-ground, as I look north, the eye rests on 
the dreary wastes of Wrynose, which the dalespeople call Wreyness, 
extending far away towards the distant source of the Duddon. To my 
left the golden browns and the yet unfaded greens mingle harmoniously 
upon the nearer fell-side, and there above comes tumbling down in a 
silvery broken stream of flashing light the beck that issues from Sea- 
thwaite Tarn with a roar which I can hear at a distance of half a mile ; 
while Grey Friars, the Old Man, the Dow Crags, and Walna Scar stretch 
in broken continuity from the north-east to the south. At my left is 



54 Holiday Studies. 

the scarped and craggy ridge of Harter Fell, roughly terraced with 
rugged slopes broken with patches of brightest verdure, on which those 
active mountaineers, the Herdwick sheep, are quietly browsing. 

Below, the sweet green valley lies soberly gay with the soft, subdued 
shining of a sun that struggles to get free from the clouds of silvery 
grey, and there winds, with many a devious reach, the vocal stream of 
Duddon. Just below lies the peaceful farm called Birks, where I know 
I shall presently receive a kindly welcome before I visit the far-famed 
Birks Brigg and Gowdrel Dub, which, being very near, I propose, 
though down stream, to visit at the same time with Birks Brigg before I 
proceed farther north. And now 

•* I seek the birthplace of a native stream — 
All hail, ye mountains ! hail, thou morning light ! 
Better to breathe at large on this clear height 
Than toil in heedless sleep from dream to dream : 
Pure flow the verse, pure, vigorous, free, and bright. 
For Duddon, long-loved Duddon, is my theme ! " 

From the plain little old farmhouse you descend through green 
pastures to the swamp, when suddenly, as you approach the river, which 
has been coming down the dale so far leisurely enough, and in a 
commonplace way, you become aware of a sudden change. From sedgy 
banks varied with the aromatic bog-myrtle, the golden bog-asphodel, 
now out of flower, the rosy red-rattle, and the milk-white green-veined 
parnassia, the river plunges in haste among wavfe-washed rocks and 
boulders, scooped into fantastic shapes, whitened with the weather and 
the water, then passes on for a few yards through a deep, dark chasm 
between perpendicular rocks, cleft with gloomy fissures, deeper and 
deeper, narrower and more narrow, not, at any rate to-day, without 
hurry to a black pit some twenty feet deep, spanned aloft by one narrow 
arch ; and here an exclamation of surprise spontaneously bursts forth 
even from a solitary wanderer as he gazes down with astonishment into 
the intense transparency of the emerald green of that pellucid pool, 
where now the water lags lazily along, only indicating the sluggishness 
of its movement by the gentle wafting of small discs of white foam 
brought from the fall close by. Whence this dazzling and most 



Wordsworth and the Duddon. 5S 

marvellous glassy greenness, reminding one of the blue beryl-like 
transparency of the deep mill-pond on the chalk in Arundel Park? 
The polished slabs of rock that line the bottom, and would no doubt 
be white if laid on the land, lie bdow as green as the emerald cushions 
of moss that make gay the trickling rocks above. Perhaps none can 
accurately explain the physical cause. 
This IS Wordsworth's Faery chasm : — 

"Abodes of naiads, calm abysses pure, 
Bright liquid mansions, fashioned to Endure 
When the broad oak drops, a leafless skeleton, 
And thie solidities of mortal pride, 
Palace and tower, are crumbled into dust ! " 

Peering rather perilously over the edge, the deafening roar of the 
torrent causing an involuntary tremor, I see the lofty crags riven with 
deep, dark fissures, where neither moss nor humblest fern can grow ; 
buttress succeeding buttress, some like the fair white flying buttresses of 
Gloucester Cathedral, all curved and hollowed out by the foaming 
torrents into a hundred weird, fantastic shapes. Here one starts at the 
unexpected sight of a colossal foot and leg of stone, from the knee 
downwards, dipping suspended in the stream, formed by the wearing 
away of the rock of volcanic ash. The resemblance is wonderful, 
making it an object of curiosity to both dalesfolk and visitors. 

Charming contrast ! Through the arch I see the clear, transparent, 
glassy pool kissed by the nodding alders, and kindled into life by the 
fiery red of a low mountain-ash in all her autumn bravery. 

There are very strange freaks of rockwork down this part of Duddon. 
Here is a huge and exactly square column of stone forty feet high, 
leaning unattached against the ferny bank, ten feet of it rising above 
the ground. It is cleft straight halfway down the middle with a clean 
fissure, with corresponding sides, as if the fracture had been a sudden 
one. The opposite bank is grand with vertical rocks richly clothed 
with verdure. But the lover of Nature who wants to hunt out these 
hidden beauties must leave the valley road and roam and climb at 
liberty. 

A very little way farther down the stream, just opposite Troutal, is 



5 6 Holiday Studies. 

Gowdrel Dub, Dub means a silent pool beloved of silvery salmon, but 
Gowdrel is not, as some suppose, the golden rill, for nowhere in Fumess 
is a stream of water ever called a rill, but a beck, the same as the 
German bach, Gowdrel is the name of the rough pasture that lies 
before it Down comes hither the stripling Duddon in a tremendous 
hurry through his deep worn channel, as though he thought it was high 
time to be moving on after sleeping so long in Birks Dub ; and so he 
sweeps on by vast square blocks that have fallen from the opposite cliff, 
where you may easily see the corresponding cavities, past rugged boulders 
and nodding sedges, past rushy banks and masses of ash, and dwarf oak, 
and birch, when suddenly down he comes again with a heavy fall, ** like 
a broken purpose," into a dark and deeply ramparted pool, where at 
once he goes to sleep, the water apparently ceasing to move, the soft, 
green, liquid transparency reappearing, as of late, in the limpid waters, 
and the bottom lined with smooth and polished rocks of lucid green, 
like the emerald banks. For a sweet little bit of gemlike mountain 
scenery, Gowdrel Dub is unsurpassable. See it if you can alone, or if 
with a friend, agree to leave behind all talk of business and the noisy^ 
whirling world. Such converse here is out of place and against the 
grain. Here are sweet sprigs of purple heather at my feet that have 
rejoiced no eyes but those of a wandering vicar. 

" Sole listener, Duddon ! to the breeze that played 
With thy dear voice, I caught the fitful sound 
Wafted o'er sullen moss and craggy mound, — 
Unfruitful solitudes, that seemed to upbraid 
The sun in heaven ! — but now, to form a shade 
For Thee, green alders have together wound 
Their foliage ; ashes flung their arms around ; 
And birch-trees risen in silver colonnade." 

So the heather sprigs have bloomed for me. May they not have 
bloomed in vain I Some days we live that do the work of years ; some 
hours there are that tinge a life. It is not given to every one to reap 
life-long enjoyment from the mere sight of a field of daffodils dancing in 
jhe sunlight ; but what is Wordsworth's moral ? 

** For oft when on my couch I lie 
In vacant or in pensive mood, 



Wordsworth and the Duddox. 57 

They flash upon that inward eye 
Which is the bliss of solitude, 
And then my heart with pleasure fills, 
And dances with the daffodils/' 

This September sky supplies the most perfect h'ght for the dale. 
The atmosphere seems refined into a crystalline clearness and purity ; 
the colouring is richer, tenderer, and more sweetly blended and 
harmonised. The bright green pastures are softly dappled over with 
shadows dropped from gently moving clouds ; shadows that He long in 
spots fixed and unmoved, with steady beams of quiet pleasant sunshine 
interposed. The glancing torrents scajir the mountain sides with streaks 
of glistening sheen. Here the isolated rock called Castle How looms 
dark and frowning, there the sweet pastures smile bright with the 
autumn after-grass ; and amidst them all glide the " trotting brooks " 
and chattering becks, and the babbling and brawling companion of 
my walk, the young Duddon ever running by my side and ever telling 
me of his busily-idle, never-ending life, and flashing merrily back the 
rays of sunlight that so liberally steep his waves in gems of purest 
light Wordsworth observes that the influence of this season in 
the dale of the Duddon is, that in it "the imagination, by the 
aid of natural scenery, is carried into recesses of feeling otherwise 
unattainable." 

Farther up the valley, opposite Dalchead, and below Black Hall, are 
stepping-stones ; but these are not the poet's far-famed stepping-stones ; 
we shall cross these much lower down, below Seathwaite. 

But here is Cockley Beck at last, Lancashire's Ultima Thule, the 
last vestige of human habitation for a very long way to come ; for here 
the dale divides, and the lonely farm stands at the meeting of three 
mountain roads. 

Here I have said the roafl divides right and left The rough road 

to the left will take you over Hardknot Pass into verdant smiling 

Eskdale. "Hardknot Castle," a shapeless and barely distinguishable 

ruin, may be discerned by a careful eye crowning the height on the 

right hand. 

** Fallen, and diffused into a shapeless heap, 
Or quietly self-buried in earth's mould. 



5 8 HouDAY Studies, 

Is that embattled House, whose massy keep 

Flung from yon cliff a shadow large and cold. 

There dwelt the gay, the beautiful, the bold, 

Till mighty lamentations, like the sweep 

Of winds — though winds were silent — struck a deep 

And lasting terror through that ancient Hold. 

Its line of warriors fled ; — they shrunk when tried 

By ghostly power ; — but Timers unsparing hand 

Hath plucked such foes, like weeds, from out the land ; 

And now, if men with men in peace abide, 

All other strength the weakest may withstand, 

All worse assaults may safely be defied." 

Here, at Cockley Beck, I shall find hospitable quarters for the night, 
with the perfection of homely rustic simplicity ; and while my simple 
supper is preparing, I stroll in the softened light of the declining sun 
up the dreary, treeless valley whence the Duddon, " child of the clouds," 

derives its birth. 

" To chant thy birth, thou hast 
No meaner poet than the whistling blast, 
And Desolation is thy patron saint ! 
She guards thee, ruthless power ! who would not spare 
Those mighty forests, once the bison's screen. 
Where stalked the huge deer to his shaggy lair 
Through paths and alleys roofed with darkest green, 
Thousands of years before the silent air 
Was pierced by whizzing shaft of hunter keen I '* 

Grandly antlered heads of these noble extinct animals are often 
found in the sands of the estuary, sometimes in quantities together. On 
Bleansley Bank, near Broughton, are ancient square enclosures, now 
almost levelled with the turf, which are generally believed to have been 
used for driving the red deer into. There are yet survivors of the 
primitive red deer in the lonely wilds of Martindale ; and up to the last 
century they still herded in Eskdale and Wastdale. One may regret 
the disappearance of these fine animals on sentimental grounds ; but 
I have been told by old farmers of the destruction they worked in 
rick-yards and among the young corn, so that it was impossible to 
tolerate them any longer. An old lady has told me how, when she 
was a girl in Martindale, she was employed in keeping off the fierce red 
deer from robbing the sheep of their winter fodder. 



Wordsworth and the Duddon. 59 

Duddon springs up above there on Wrynose Gap in a swampy 
tableland, the watershed between the cheerful, happy-looking valley of 
Langdale and the vale of Duddon, not many yards intervening between 
the sources of the Brathay and of our Duddon. The famous Three 
Shire Stones preside at the birth of both, where without any great ex- 
tension of the person one may lie at the same moment in the three 
counties of Lancashire, Westmoreland, and Cumberland. For if the 
Duddon exactly divides Cumberland from Lancashire, the sod next 
beyond the source must be in Westmoreland. 

There amid cloud and storm, and desolation vast and drear, the 
infant Duddon begins his course with slow uncertain * step. Many 
streams tumbling down the amphitheatre of dark hillsides join the 
main current which, when it reaches the bottom of the treeless waste of 
Wrynose Bottom, is already a rapid, clamorous stream commencing its 
endless war of stones and waters. 

"No check, no stay this streamlet fears, 
How merrily it goes ! 
*Twill murmur on a thousand years. 
And flow as now it flows." 

The morning after breaks with a pure and pearly light, and I take a 
kindly farewell of my pleasant entertainers. How we glory while we 
gaze ! Glory in all creation, bountiful, infinitely beautiful, teeming with 
objects sublime and majestic or minutely lovely, which create thoughts 
too deep for utterance. 

Seeing is happiness without the labour of reflection ; and we feel 
that we are commencing 

" One of those heavenly days that cannot die." 

What marvellous and incredible effects are produced by the play 
and combination of the changeful atmospheric light upon running 
waters! Here runneth a brook, only a yard wide, flowing with great 
rapidity after last night's copious rain.* I am drawn aside to gaze at 
the liquid lapse of shining waters by the strange spectacle of an intense 
and brilliant opal light within of mingling prismatic and iridescent hues 

••For the rain is very plentiful here, over 100 inches in a year. 



6o Holiday Studies. 

of violet and purple, azure blue and malachite-greens, with amber yellow, 
harmoniously blended with shininp^ russet browns. I stop to ascertain 
what can be the cause of this new phenomenon. What can compose 
the streamlet's bed that rolls with hues so strange and fairy-like ? And 
I see with surprise merely the long and waving tresses of bedded water- 
grass and pond-weed, washed into graceful motion by the impetuous 
limpid stream, whose light is blended with reflections from the flower- 
spangled bank, from a low green mossy wall, and from a sky struggling 
between sunshine and cloud. These alone, with dioptric laws of which 
no account can be rendered, combine to produce an unusual metallic 
lustre such as I never saw before, except faintly imitated in imaginative 
pictures of fairy-land, nor ever expect to see again. It is " that light 
that never shone o'er land or sea." 

Perhaps the most remarkable advantage, in an artistic point of view, 
which we possess in the Lake district, is the ever-shifting and change- 
ful character of the scenery. We have the same physical features 
continually before our eyes under perpetually varying effects of light 
and shadow, running through all imaginable shades that are possible 
in Nature, from bright celestial blue, and green like that of emeralds, to 
purple bathed in rose, and ending for a while in the darkest hues. I 
have seen Black Combe mantled in snow on a bright winter's morning 
at sunrise, royally clothed in alpine hues of rose and pink and violet and 
gold, shining with the brilliancy of the diamond. From Helvellyn I 
have seen, after a rainy morning, Ullswater lying mapped below of an 
ultramarine of incredible brilliancy, and all the rolling ocean of moun- 
tains, valleys, and plains beyond bathed in crystalline cerulean blue ; 
but encompassed in a frame of vast black precipices which seemed to 
be steeped in night, while a heavenly light smiled upon all the rest of 
the scene. 

Here each grey and slate-roofed humble tenement is half-hidden in 
its setting of sycamore-trees, and is encompassed by its little farm of 
twelve to twenty acres of green pasture ; and you long to bid good 
morning to the quiet and honest folk that dwell in them ; and they are 
glad if you do, and will talk with you as long as you like, for they see 
very few strangers passing up and down this dale. Then comes the 



Wordsworth and the Duddon. 6i 

wild fell again ; then another ancient cottage, but perhaps whitewashed 
this time, till you come to the " open prospect," where they lie scattered 
over a wider tract. About a mile from Seathwaite Church, 

**Hail to the Fields — with dwellings sprinkled o'er, 
And one small hamlet, under a green hill 
Clustering, with bam and byre, and spouting mill ! 
A glance suffices.'' 

Here the narrow dale opens out, and the rural valley spreads before 
us, green and charming. The farms, instead of being separated by wild 
bits of fell land, are only divided from each other by dimpling Becks 
and moss-grown fences.* Behind Tongue House you see a mountain- 
path climbing to Seathwaite Tarn, a lonely sheet of water lying 1,210 
feet high, yet bosomed deep beneath Grey Friar and the Old Man, with 
their outlying buttresses. It is a favourite spot for a picnic for the 
neighbouring gentry and their friends. Fifty will sometimes gather 
here for a merry day. The tarn is drawn, the trout and char come 
in by hundreds, and are cooked on the spot in some fissure of the rocks, 
and never any sauce is asked for but the keen appetite engendered by 
the ozone in the mountain air. This elevated glep is full of interest to 
the geologist, with its moraines, its blocs perch^s^ and its accumulations 
of boulders, where the ice last melted after the glacial period. 

It is the weathering of innumerable ages which has produced these 
manifold fantastic forms of rock, and caused the downfall and the 
mysterious distribution of vast detached blocks, which have lain for 
centuries resting upon, or lying against, each other, the erratic boulders 
weathering with age to a creamy whiteness. 

But here are, a short way apart, two venerable grey cottages, each 
nestling under its own steep rude crag. The first is Nettleslack, which 
is deserted, though not entirely ruined ; the other is called Undercrag, 
and is in excellent repair, and inhabited by Joseph Walker — some 

? '* Thy church and cottages of mountain stone, 
Clustered like stars some few, but singly some, 
And lurking dimly in their shy retreats, 
Or glancing at each other's cheerful looks, 
Like separated stars with clouds between." 

(See Knight's ** Wordsworth," p. 42.) 



62 Holiday Studies, 

descendant (though I was told the kindred is " worn out ") of Walker 
" The Wonderful." In which of these cottages the venerable pastor of 
Seathwaite was born is uncertain among the dalespeople, though the 
guide-books and local histories pronounce without hesitation for 
Undercrag. 

As I pass the new chapel of Seathwaite (sprung up fresh and 
beautiful from the very site of its revered predecessor), I bow my head 
in deep and heartfelt respect for the venerable pastor, whose name is 
still (1883) here held in honour and regard after the eighty years since 
he exchanged his rustic wreath of honest fame for an incorruptible 
crown of glory. 

" Sacred Religion ! * mother of form and fear,' 
Dread arbi tress of mutable respect, 
New rites ordaining when the old are wrecked, 
Or cease to ple«ise the fickle worshipper. 
Mother of Love ! (that name best suits thee here) 
Mother of Love ! In this deep vale, protect 
Truth's holy lamp, pure source of bright effect, 
Gifted to purge the vapouring atmosphere 
That seeks to stifle it ; — as in those days 
When this low Pile a Gospel Teacher knew, 
Whose good works formed an endless retinue : 
A Pastor such as Chaucer's verse portrays ; 
Such as the heaven-taught skill of Herbert drew ; 
And tender Goldsmith crowned with deathless praise." 

I will not enter heie into the almost legendary history of the Rev. 
Robert Walker, surnamed " The Wonderful." It has been told so often, 
in almost precisely the same words, that one is rather tired of hearing 
the same unvar>'ing tale. So much is certain, that he died in 1802, at 
the age of ninety- three, having been sixty-seven years incumbent of 
Seathwaite; and that his wife died in 1800, at the same advanced 
age. That he was a man of great industry and thrift, and of unsullied 
honesty and integrity, is also certain, or his successor would not have 
made in the burial register the remarkable entry : " He was a man 
singular for his temperance, industry, and integrity." 

Before I began personally to inquire into the history of the Rev, 
Robert Walker, I used to think that surely he must have owed much of 



Wordsworth and the Dud don, 63 

his honourable fame to the fortunate circumstance that he had been 
sung by the first and hitherto the greatest of the laureated poets of 
England. But it is not so. I am at this moment fresh from a conversa- 
tion with two venerable ladies (sisters), parishioners of Broughton, 
who were both baptised by him, and who spent the best portion of a 
long life in Seathwaite, and they good-humouredly laugh to scorn 
the idea of Mr. Walker being indebted for his fame to a mere poet. 
" Oh, no, sir ; he was good in every way. We never heard any- 
body say a word against him." 

When he accepted the living of Seathwaite, £$ a year, a cottage, 
and an acre of glebe, with £^0 by his excellent wife, were all he had to 
live upon.* The £^0 went to furnish the house, and yet when he died 
he had to leave to his children the sum of £2^000, solely the fruits of 
honest industry and frugality. There, dwelling amongst his people, he 
lived and ministered both spiritually and temporally for the space of 
sixty-seven years to his scattered parishioners, numbering about a 
hundred and thirty souls, with invariable kindness and fidelity, with the 
grave dignity becoming his position, and bearing a stainless and per- 
fectly irreproachable character. He brought up a family of eleven 
children, educated them wholly himself, with his child-parishioners, in 
the humble little chapel, sitting within the altar-rails, and using the 
communion-table as his desk. While he taught he was spinning at his 
wheel. All his scholars (with one of whom, eighty years of age, I con- 
versed twelve years ago) well remember his unvarying kindness and 
good temper ; and he produced such scholars in more than merely 

• Those were days of distressing poverty for the country clergy in these northern parts, when 
** £S^ year, goose-grass, harden sark (a tough durable shirt), and whittlegate " were all that 
many of the best of the clergy might look to for a living. ** Whittlegate is to have two or three 
weeks* victuals at each house, according to the ability of the inhabitants, which was settled amongst 
them so that the parson should go his course as regular as the sun, and complete it as annually. 
Few houses having more knives than one or two, the pastor was often obliged to buy his own 
t though sometimes it was bought for him by the chapel wardens), and march from house to house 
with his whittle seeking fresh pasturage ; as master of the herd he demanded the elbow-chair at 
the table-head, which was often made of part of a hollow ash-tree, as may in these parts be 
seen at this day. A person was thought a proud fellow in those days that was not content with- 
out a fork to his knife ; he was reproved for it, and told that fingers were made before forks." — 
** Survey of the Lakes,*' by James Clark, land surveyor, 1787. The same authority affirms that 
some pastors were fortunate enough to obtain a suit of clothes annually from their compassionate 
parishioners. 



64 Holiday Studies, 

elementary subjects as have never been surpassed in Seathvvaite since. 
He made no charge for teaching, and only received occasionally grateful 
and substantial acknowledgments from his parishioners. He did all 
their legal work, such as making wills, drawing up leases, agreements, 
and so forth. He performed all kinds of husbandry, including sheep- 
shearing, cutting and drying peat ; and he excelled in all those employ- 
ments, " for he was a wonderfully clever man," said my aged informants, 
kindling with enthusiasm, and was always ready to help his neighbours 
in their agricultural or their pastoral labours, receiving in recompense, 
perhaps, a quarter of a sheep or a fleece in a year — perhaps less ; but 
whatever he did and whatever he took, all was done pleasantly and 
kindly. The " high-enders " from Troutal or Cockley Beck always 
came to church whenever it was possible. In his days no one dreamed 
of staying from church unless absolutely prevented ; and for all those 
distant wayfarers he always had basins of broth prepared, and took no 
pay — so my good old parishioners positively assure me ; although some, 
with less claim to know, venture to affirm that he charged twopence a 
head, which I am now sincerely glad to be able to deny. Those were 
pre-teetotal days, and he lost neither dignity nor character by brewing 
a pure light ale, which he gave in strict moderation for a small payment 
to wayfarers passing up or down that long and lonely valley, on a stone 
seat on the other side of the road before the Parsonage, adding bread 
and cheese free of charge. 

He was a rather short, stout man, of ruddy complexion (so I have 
it from accurate information),* and he always wore a long blue gown 
made of wool spun by his own hand, and confined round the waist with 
a leathern strap. Wooden clogs he wore, as a matter of course. All 
the large and accumulating store of family linen was of their own spin- 
ning, the stray tufts of wool being constantly picked off the brambles 
and hedges, wherever they found them, to be carded and spun. 

It is remembered with a yet unfaded gratitude how he declined the 
addition of the curacy of Ulpha to his own, on the ground that he could 
not properly be schoolmaster and clergyman to both parishes at once, 

? A grcat-ncphew of his, a labourer, in my parish corresponds exactly with that description. 
But most of his numerous descendants are of much higher station than labourers. 



Wordsworth and the Duddon, 65 

which would have created a feeling of dissatisfaction among the mem- 
bers of his beloved Seathwaite flock. 

A little of romance enters into Canon Parkinson's account of him ; 
but there is none in the grave and truthful description given with so 
much grace by Wordsworth. It is remarkable that he was never 
known as "the Wonderful" in his lifetime, nor for long after, until 
Canon Parkinson seems to have invented or discovered the epithet. 
There is no question whatever in my mind, after gleaning and gathering 
up with reverent care the fading memories of eighty years, that the love 
and the respect that cling to the venerated name of Robert Walker, like 
the sweet, long-clinging odour of sandal-wood, is wholly genuine, and is 
entirely independent of that which, to the people of the dale, is the mere 
adventitious aid either of poetry or of prose. 

Just behind the Parsonage is an old and ruined carding-mill, which 
was turned, when it worked, by the Seathwaite Tarnbcck, and not by 
the Duddon ; so that, after all, the poet is right when he sings — 

" Child of the clouds ! remote from every taint 
Of sordid industry thy lot is cast." 

But forgive the poet ! He did not mean to denounce all industry as 
sordid ; only if it polluted his " long-loved Duddon " ! 

Crossing a few meadows past the ruined carding-mill, we come at 
last to Wordsworth's own " Stcpping-Stones," under Wallabarrow Crag, 
which many a visitor seeks in vain. 

"The struggling rill insensibly is grown 
Into a brook of loud and stately march. 
Crossed ever and anon by plank or arch ; 
And, for like use, lo ! what might seem a zone 
Chosen for ornament — stone matched with stone 
In studied symmetry, with interspace 
For the clear waters to pursue their race 
"Without restraint How swiftly have they flown, 
Succeeding— still succeeding ! Here the Child 
Puts, when the high swoln Flood runs fierce and wild. 
His budding courage to the proof ; and here 
Declining Manhood learns to note the sly 
And sure encroachments of infirmity — 
Thinking how fast Time runs, life's end how near I 

E 



66 Holiday Studies. 

Not so that Pair whose youthful spirits dance 
With prompt emotion, urging them to pass ; 
A sweet confusion checks the shepherd lass ; 
Blushing she eyes the dizzy flood askance ; 
To stop ashamed — too timid to advance ; 
She ventures once again — another pause ! 
His outstretched hand he tauntingly withdraws — 
She sues for help with piteous utterance ! 
Chidden, she chides again ; the thrilling touch 
Both feel, when he renews the wished-for aid : 
Ah ! if their fluttering hearts should stir too much. 
Should beat too strongly, both may be betrayed. 
The frolic Loves, who from yon high rock see 
The struggle, clap their wings for victory ! " 

Thus the poet pictures childhood, youth, and age putting their 
budding or their declining powers to the proof in crossing the rapid 
river by that hazardous-looking path. Then a youth and a maiden are 
imagined, the one with provoking playfulness, the other with timid 
remonstrance, venturing over this most welcome and delightful way of 
not unpleasant peril. They certainly do require a sure foot and a 
steady eye who venture across, and I felt glad when I had got safely 
over. There are seventeen large and well-worn stepping-stones in the 
stream, which runs swiftly with an ordinary depth of about eighteen 
inches. 

From Seathwaite to Ulpha let the active tourist by no means 
travel ignominiously in a carriage by the high-road down the valley, but 
continue his way past the stepping-stones under Wallabarrow, one of 
the noblest isolated crags in Europe. There he is again rejoined 
by his noisy, chattering companion, the Duddon, considerably broader, 
but not one whit steadier, since we saw him last This is a charming 
rural walk amongst green pastures and wooded fells, with pleasant- 
looking farm-houses at intervals. 

Here we encounter an interesting geological curiosity. Skirting the 
stream by a foot-path, we suddenly come upon a section of the river-bed 
where, for some 150 yards, the water seems to run of a bloody red. In 
spots up and down the valley, but all in one straight line, a hard rock of 
a rich red crops out One in particular, in an elevated position among 
the woods, stands out conspicuously from a distance, ruddy amidst the 



Wordsworth and the Duddon, 67 

m 

green trees. It is a red felsite dike — a fissure of unknown depth, of 
volcanic origin, running two miles from Wallabarrow to Troutal, and of 
only a few yards in width. The river breaking off small fragments, and 
rolling them down till they become smooth rounded pebbles, gives us 
those pretty bits of colour we see enlivening the bed of the river at 
Duddon Bridge, and which also supply the small red boulders that here 
and there stud the pebble pavements of Broughton. 

There is an exceedingly fine reach of the Duddon not far from 
Ulpha Kirk, where the river runs swiftly between huge bare masses of 
grey rock, boldly and deeply cleft, arched overhead by trees, and a 
beautiful little waterfall plunging down from the bank into the river. 
Here the Osmunda is found superbly tall, and the starry Parnassia 
beautiful and abundant. The spot is a perfect gem of beauty, and well 
worth a deviation. 

Ulpha Church, called by the older people Oopha Kirk, here domi- 
nates the vale — 

"The Kirk of Ulpha to the pilgrim's eye 
Is welcome as a star, that doth present 
Its shining forehead through the peaceful rent 
Of a black cloud diffused o'er half the sky." 

Like too many other churches in the district, it was a mouldy, 
earthy-smelling, squalid, and poverty-stricken rustic place of worship ; 
but has, under a new and active young vicar, been thoroughly emptied 
of all its grotesque and ungraceful contents, and refurnished with a 
simple and refined taste ; and now it looks just as it should do^not 
debased and dirty, but light and clean and neat in every part The 
exterior, with the exceptions of a new porch, belfry, and lych-gate, 
remains exactly as Wordsworth saw it, when he used to meditate in the 
vale, and stay at the Kirk-house, a name often given to the village inn 
in these parts. The memory of the poet, as a poet, still survives among 
the aged in the valley, which, as he was born in 1770 and died in 1850, 
may very well be. An old lady remembers well his kindness to 
children, and how fond he was of patting them on the head. 

Very restful and very charming to the eye and mind is the prospect 
of this plain and homely little church looking down so peacefully upon 



6S Holiday Studies. 

the rushing torrent far below, which, for want of anything better to do, 
has been busy for ages scooping out the great blue-grey rocks in the 
river-bed into a variety of the strangest forms. 

On a stone of the bridge is rudely carved "Watch, 1749," cut, it 
is said, during a severe visitation of pestilence, when cattle were not 
allowed to pass out of one county into the next. 

The Duddon Sonnets portray no woodland scenes below Ulpha 
Bridge. But as there is some surpassingly beautiful scenery below that 
point, we will yet continue our journey. From the bridge the main 
road leads along the foot of the Dunnerdale Fells to Broughton and 
to Millom. The scenery, though grand and noble, is bare and wild. 
In the boggy streams running off these fells is found the great sundew 
{Drosera atigiica), a rare plant. The valley is shut in between imposing 
rocky crags of a pale grey colour on the Dunnerdale or Lancashire 
side ; on the Cumberland side by the majestic woods of Duddon Hall 
and the mountain called the Pen, and all the Black Combe range of 
fells. It must have been with his customary bold defiance of the 
realistic school that Wordsworth chose to speak of the Plain of 
Dunnerdale, where of plane country there is none . whatever ; and 
being in my own parish, of course I know Dunnerdale and all its snug 
farms intimately. The name is probably from Duddon dale, as the 
island of Dunnerholme would be from Duddon holm. 

We follow down the stream on the Cumberland side, as containing 
the most picturesque objects. All this side of the Duddon abounds 
in the loveliest woodland scenery, which here we survey in quieter 
mood, " soothed by the unseen river's gentle roar." Vast moss-grown 
fragments of rock or boulders are everywhere overshadowed by beech 
and fir, by oak and ash ; the shady banks are graced with plumy beech- 
fern, and the darker recesses carpeted with the oak-fern. Every bridge 
down the river is darkly clad in rue-fern and in maidenhair spleenwort. 
I know the Cystopteris fragilis growing just where it should do, on a 
long narrow band of limestone; but not wanting it to be all carried 
away, I refrain from particularising the spot ; and I must be equally 
reticent about the Hymenophyllutn, which covers the boulders in some 
moist places. The Impaiiefis \s found in abundance in the moist and 



Wordsworth and the Duddox. 69 

shady woods. The lily of the valley abounds in a wood not to be 

entered without leave. The globe- flowers make the banks gay. In 

fact, there are fe^ richer botanical fields than the lower Duddon. In 
Sonnet VI. occurs the line — - 

** The trembling eyebright showed her sapphire blue." 

Would it have spoiled good poetry to have read instead more truly, 
•* the bright germander," as Tennyson says, " her blue germander eye " ? 
For the eyebright is Euphrasia officinalis, a pretty little white flower 
with streaks of purple and yellow, and the germander speedwell is 
certainly the blue flower here meant. 

Arriving near to Duddon Hall, we cross the Loggan beck, a tribu- 
tary of the Duddon, a stream which, taking its rise in black swamps and 
spongy moors far up the fells, comes thundering down through cloven 
rocks and sylvan ferny shades, till it reaches the woods, where, down a 
bed filled with huge blue-grey boulders, it tears along round one 
obstacle, and overleaps another with a scornful bound, here curling itself 
snugly up in calm and silent pools, there rushing off again with a loud 
roar to dash itself down a miniature precipice ; here lovingly encircled 
by fondly drooping boughs, there throwing itself headlong down a clear 
and skylit space, and finding at last a brief rest at Beckfoot among 
cottages and homesteads such as an artist loves to paint. Then again 
gathering fresh strength below the broken bridge, the Loggan leaps at a 
bound into a deep and narrow chasm darkened with overhanging trees, 
forming pictures of exquisite beauty. Then on again with a rush and a 
vigorous roar, it adds its turmoij and its din to that of the now mighty 
Duddon, growing fiercer and stronger by the union to force its way 
through the deep and awful chasm at Hawes Bridge. 

Immediately below the bridge is a deep glassy pool, Rawfold dub, 

" whose depths surpass 



In crystal clearness Dian's looking-glass;" 
where the silvery salmon loves to sleep, poised on equal fin. 

Descending the lower reaches of the Duddon valley on the Cumber- 
land side, while the silver flashing river rolls on its course to liquid 



70 Holiday Studies. 

music, the eye is conducted upward through the thick woods, rising 
stage above stage, and the naked fells peering above them, and thence 
to the sky-line, where the generally undulating or slightly irregular 
contour of the rocks of volcanic ash is abruptly broken by a rude vast mass 
of angular black crags, called Buckbarrow,* of which, at this distance, 
you can hardly conjecture the composition. This rocky pile of split and 
fissured crags, on a near examination, is found to be well worth the long 
rough walk by which it is to be reached. Let me, then (just fresh from 
an actual inspection), endeavour to describe the nature and appearance 
of these singular crags. The way upon wheels or on horseback from 
Broughton would be over Duddon Bridge, past Duddon Hall, rising on 
the wild fell road to Bootle, until, at about six miles from Broughton, it 
brings you within a mile and a half of the crags. Here the carriage 
must be left (and there is no shelter for it for a long way), and the 
horseman or pedestrian must make the best of his way over rising rough 
and boggy ground to the height of about 900 feet above the sea-level, 
where he reaches the strange gloomy pile of jagged and broken, shat- 
tered and riven volcanic rocks, of which it seems natural to believe that 
we are actually standing over the crater of a small extinct volcano. 
It stands isolated on the ridge of the fell, a conspicuous object from 
Broughton, covering a space of about three or four acres. The huge 
rampart of black rock, blasted and tormented by the storms of a thou- 
sand ages, bristles with vast blocks or pinnacles of a hard volcanic ash. 
Awful for their dark immovable grandeur, they sternly rise bold and 
bluff, here into pinnacled crags, there worn down by the innumerable 
tempests which have beaten fiercely upon them from some period long 
anterior to the Glacial Age down to the soft, though still transitional, 
beauty of the age in which we now live. Grand is the belt of the ever- 
lasting hills which encircle us in the far-distant horizon on the land side, 
and the blue sea and the spreading yellow sands of Duddon to the west 
and south. And yet this wondrous scene is one of the almost unknown 
spots of the borderland of the Lake District No guide-book but 
Baddeley's refers to it. I dare say none have ever visited it but the 

• This crag is also called Worm (i.^r., Dragon) Crag. 



Wordsworth and thr Duddon. 71 

neighbouring shepherds, the sportsmen, and the officers of the Geo- 
logical and other Ordnance Surveys. I believe it to be a once sub- 
marine, and then upheaved, volcano. A hard volcanic ash, light grey 
and spotted with white, composes it, and a lava harder still crops out 
in a south-easterly direction. Some little conception of the geological 
history of these fells is a sensible addition to the interest felt in their 
exploration. Here, within the short space of a mile, are visible 
evidences both of the existence of the volcanic fires of past ages 
and of glacial action. After the age of fire, succeeded, at a long 
interval, the ice age, when the vale of Duddon was just as full 
of ice, in all the sublime glory and majesty of glacier forms, as 
is the Rhone Glacier now for twenty-five miles above the living 
source of the infant Rhone. But how do we know this } We 
know it certainly by the evidence of the action of the grinding and 
polishing of the ice-torrent, in its slow and ponderous passage down to 
the icy sea below, upon the hardened volcanic ash through which the 
Duddon at length has worn its way. Just above the Duddon woods 
stretch out long spaces of hardened rock, polished to the smoothness 
of glass by the passage of the ice-torrent, bearing down with it the 
boulders and the gravels, which have planed the rugged surfaces of 
rock to that polish which they retain down to this day. Just such 
smooth surfaces of rock, but vastly greater, are well known on most 
of the Swiss Alpine passes, especially, as I well remember, on the St. 
Gothard, and the wonderful Hdhle Platte on the Grimsel, over which 
neither horse nor man could pass without the help of a roughened track. 
Here we stand over that which might become the ruin of our 
empire. Beneath our feet is a crust of solid matter, but how perilously 
thin contrasted with the immeasurable depth and mass of fluid fire 
on which it rests with a precarious endurance of which the unrefjective 
mind has no conception ! The ground on which we think we stand so 
securely to-day, 6nce undoubtedly vomited torrents of liquid fire and 
rivers of molten lava, now hardened into the volcanic ash we see 
all around us. Suppose these subterranean dormant fires were to burst 
out afresh, the land to become volcanic again, like that which borders 
the Cordilleras, and earthquakes and the great eruptive forces- again 



72 Holiday Studies. 

to resume their awful sway — could England survive it ? Her magnificent 
public and private edifices overthrown ; her great stone bridges levelled 
with the ground ; the Forth cantilever Bridge, and the Britannia tubular 
Bridge, not perhaps thrown down, but twisted out of the beautiful 
straightness without which they would become worthless ; her closely 
packed cities heaped in piles of ruin — all this might be the result of 
two or three minutes* heaving and trembling of an earthquake in a 
single night. The public records would be lost. Government would be 
too seriously embarrassed to be able to hold together. England would 
be bankrupt, and sink down to the rank of the weak and thinly 
populated states of the lands of the volcano and the earthquake. 

Though some eight miles distant, I cannot resist the temptation 
here to refer to a spot always associated in my mind with the honoured 
name of John Ruskin, my kin J and dear friend during the time that he 
enjoyed good health. There is a very wonderful example of rock- 
weathering, situated by the dark and melancholy tarn called Goat's 
Water, which lies in the deep and rock-encompassed hollow between 
the Dow Crags and the Old Man, by whose side rise, gaunt and weird, 
some strange rocks, furrowed and scored and corrugated all over, 
e.xactly as the sea-sands are ripple-marked after the tide has left them. 
I first drew to it the attention of some officers of the Geological Ord- 
nance Survey who hapi)ened, fortunately, to be then working on the 
si)()t, and they have dul}' recorded the phenomenon in their observa- 
tions. Soon after, Mr. Ruskin and I made this the object of a summer 
day's excursion from Brantwood — a day not to be forgotten — and a 
mountain walk, in which I satisfied at least myself that my friend, in 
an unconventional fashion of his own, not readily intelligible to every- 
body, differing from some who "hold the truth in unrighteousness," 
and notwithstanding certain protestations made on former occasions, is 
indeed a Christian man, a servant of God, who holds the truth in 
righteousness. Of course there are not a few who, working by line and 
rule, would fit everybody in the matrix from which they issued them- 
selves, and will be surprised at this declaration, which, however, without 
presuming to judge any who differ from me, I make in all sincerity. 



Wordsworth and the Duddon, Ji 

On these remarkable rocks my friend makes the following remark 
in " Deucalion," page 222 : — " The most wonderful piece of weathering 
in all my own district is on a projecting mass of intensely hard rock on 
the eastern side of Goat's Water. It was discovered and shown to me 
by my friend the Rev. F. A. Malleson; and exactly resembles deep 
ripple-marking, though • nothing in the grain of the rock indicates its 
undulating structure." 

[Since writing the above reminiscence of my few years' friendship 
with Mr. Ruskin (the intercourse, but not the friendship, being broken by 
his illness), a new and happy revelation has been made to me— a com- 
plete corroboration of hopes which before had but a struggling existence. 

On February 5, this year 1890 (the first really brilliant day after two 
months of storms and heavy rains), the Rector of Grasmere and myself 
had taken out the Rev. Canon G. E. Mason, the admirable conductor of 
a Retreat of Clergy at Rydal (then in its midst), along the lovely banks 
of Rydal Water, when the conversation chanced to fall upon the circum- 
stances just narrated, and Mr. Fletcher mentioned that in "Praeterita" 
Mr. Ruskin had made a clear and unhesitating statement of his faith in 
the Christian religion. At my request, he very kindly sent me a copy of 
the passage to which he referred, which I shall here give in full : — 

" In these days of the religion of this and that — briefly, let us say, the religion of 
Stocks and Posts — in order to say a clear word of the Campo Santo, one must first 
say a firm word concerning Christianity itself. I find numbers, even of the most 
intelligent and amiable people, not knowing what the word means ; because they are 
always asking how much is true, and how much they like, and never ask, first, what 
was the total meaning of it, whether they like it or not. 

" The total meaning was, and is, that the God who made earth and its creatures 
took at a certain time upon the earth the flesh and form of man ; in that flesh sus- 
tained the pain and died the death of the creature He had made ; rose again after 
death into glorious human life ; and when the date of the human race is ended, 
will return in visible human form, and render to every man according to his work. 
Christianity is the belief in and love of God thus manifested. Anything less than 
this, the mere acceptance of the sayings of Christ, or assertion of any less than Divine 
power in His Being, may be, for aught I know, enough for virtue, peace, and safety ; 
but they do not make people Christians, or enable them to understand the heart of 
the simplest believer in the old doctrine." — "Praeterita," Vol. II. (ed. 1887), 
pp. 208, 209. 

To have known and loved and admired John Ruskin in his days of 



74 HouDAY Studies. 

health and strength, to have grieved over his doubts and struggles, and 
to see at length the clouds rolled away, and the Sun of Righteousness 
risen with healing in His wings, as the sun in the heavens was on that 
day by Rydal Water shining in unclouded glory out of a serene sky, and 
glittering in the placid surface of the sweet blue lake at our feet, after 
so long a season of storm and darkness, was an experience calling for 
the deepest thankfulness.] 

Shall I be forgiven if I quote the following short passage from a 
published letter addressed to the writer ? — 

"I have this morning been reading your own [comments], on which I very 
earnestly congratulate you. God knows it is not because they are friendly or com- 
plimentary, but because you do see what I mean ; and people hardly ever do ; and I 
think it needs very considerable power and feeling to forgive and understand as you 
do." — "Letters to the Clergy on the Lord*s Prayer and the Church," page 371. 

I may, I trust, without any violation of confidence, relate the 
apparently slight event that preceded our mountain walk to see the 
curious rocks at Goat's Water. I had visited Mr. Ruskin at Brantwood, 
and in a conversation in the drawing-room he had come to the point 
that he said, " I have already given up the Resurrection," when the 
door-bell rang, and he added, "It is well that we are interrupted, or I 
might have said things that would have pained you more still." Shortly 
after came the invitation (1879) to explore the flanks of the Old Man of 
Coniston, the quiet lunch, the pleasant row across the lake, and the 
slow toilsome ascent of the mountain by two men in close conference, 
both beginning to feel the inroads of age. 

The last scene of all is up the stream above Duddon Bridge, just one 

mile from the quaint and ancient little village-town of Broughton-in- 

Furncss. The whole neighbourhood is graced and beautified with 

woods, with flowers, ferns, and pretty cottages at Bank End embowered 

in shade ; while looking up the placid sheet of Duddon, and just above 

the bridge, is a finished landscape of wood and water, rhountain and 

fell, seen by the writer a thousand times with undiminished love and 

interest. 

" So may thy poet, cloud-bom stream ! be free — 
The sweets of earth contentedly resigned. 



Wordsworth and the Duddon. 75 

And each tumultuous working left behind 
At seemly distance — to advance like thee ; 
Prepared in peace of heart, in calm of mind 
And soul, to mingle with Eternity." 

Soon after this, Duddon enters the staid and sober stage of his later 
existence. His gambols and his merry pranks are ended, and, now that 
the last bridge is passed, he soon spreads widely over the sandy estuary. 

" Not hurled precipitous from steep to steep ; 
Lingering no more 'mid flower-enamelled lands 
And blooming thickets ; nor by rocky bands 
Held ; but in radiant progress towards the Deep 
Where mightiest rivers into powerless sleep 
Sink, and forget their nature — now expands 
Majestic Duddon, over smooth flat sands, 
Gliding in silence with unfettered sweep ! 
Beneath an ampler sky a region wide 
Is opened round him: hamlets, towers, and towns, 
And blue-topped hills, behold him from afar.** 

What a contrast to the origin of the stream, only sixteen miles 
above ! This child of the cloudy heavens enjoys a bright and happy 
youth, and dies young, entering the sea still clear and bright, and not 
yet sullied or impure. So might our childhood, so might our manhood, 
and even our old age, run sparkling and unsullied, till it enters into its 
rest in the all-embracing arms of the Everlasting Father. 

" We, the brave, the mighty, and the wise. 
We Men, who in our mom of youth defied 
The elements, must vanish ; — be it so ! 
Enough, if something from our hands have power 
To live, and act, and serve the future hour ; 
And if, as toward the silent tomb we go. 
Through love, through hope, and faith's transcendent dower, 
We feel that we are greater than we know/' 

1883. 



X 



Some Swfaa flotes. 



Some Swiss Notes. 

The Culle and the Battle of Grandson— Yverdon — Education in Swiluiland— Temperance — 
Great Slonn of 187? — Bormio^The Iron Gates of Cepina — Lago di Scale — Abundance of 
Cbniches and Wajside Shrines— .Santa C&teiina — Stody of Alpine Scenery — Decaj and 
Beggsiy at Bormio— Cretinism. 

SHE single line of rails from Neuch&tel to Yverdon runs close 
by the water-side, in which lie mirrored the low green hills 
of Friboui^, unfurnished with the vines which clothe its 
Vaudois banks, and the white villages and small towns 
repeating themselves in its limpid waters ; but the brightest 
reflection of all is that of the jagged line of the gleaming 
Alps of Fribourg and Berne, which are not of the race of giants that 
tower into the sky further south, but yet are clothed with snow as far 
down as we can see. We pass Vaumarcus, the true battlefield of 
Grandson, which Sir Walter Scott, in "Anne of Geierstcin" (with his usual 
inaccuracy in matters of detail) miscalled Vaumoreux ; while he also, 
in the same narrative, transposed the head and the foot of the lake, 
NeuchAtcl lying really at the foot and Yverdon at the head. The easy- 
going train stops at Grandson, which we visited at a later day, but will 
take the opportunity of mentioning in detail now. The Swiss chateaux, 
unlike the Schlosser of Tyrol, are castles indeed, towered and battle- 
men ted, solidly built for defence in those troublous days before the Swiss 
bad leaim, as they have only so lately learnt, to appreciate the blessings 
of national unity. 

The castle of Grandson is built on a high rock near the water-side, 
which used to bathe its feet, before the lake, by drainage, sank several 
feet, leaving a wide and desolate pebbly shore. Round a spacious 
courtyard, once the scene of jousts and tournaments, as well as of more 
serious conflicts, runs a lofty wooden gallery, standing exactly as it was 
constructed many centuries ago for attack and defence, and for holi- 
day spectators of the rough sports below. We were shown a horrible 



^O H'jULAY STVDtES. 



dungeon, to which, no doabt. Sir Walter was indebted for his descriptkni 
of the dark and dLsmal cell at La Jarette, in which Arthur Philipson was 
ruthlessly cast, ^ith the momentary- prospect of sinking through the 
cavcmed floor, which gaped beneath him, and in the ghastly depths of 
which he could hear the sullen plashing of the hun^rj- waters which 
were to receive his corpse, crushed and torn in its fall on the opposing 
blades and spikes which bristled round its sides. Such was the horrible 
ab>'ss shown to us, only half shorn of its terrors. Outside the castle 
walls stood the gloomy and forbidding keep, still darkened with rankly 
growing vegetation, where the butcher Charles of Burgundy hui^ the 
brave defenders of their beautiful countrj- by hundreds from the 
branches of the trees. A stone bullet shot from the artillery pf Charles, 
which thundered from the heights above, is still seen half embedded high 
up in the wall of the castle. Well was it for the brave sons of Heh-etia 
that, fearless of the terrible odds of four to one, they rushed upon the 
too-confident foe, fought for half an hour, and dro\'c them back in 
irretrievable rout. Within is a small collection of arms found in the 
neighbourhood — some on land, some in the lake itself — among them the 
two-handed swords (to which, with the stout arms and stouter hearts 
that swung them, the Swiss owed their complete victor>-), battle-axes, 
and frightful-looking spherical-headed clubs armed ^-ith long sharp steel 
spikes, which must have done terrible execution. The views from the 
castle across the lake are of great beauty. The castle itself is in good 
repair, and is the residence and property of an Italian gentleman. The 
beautiful and quiet western borders of the lake of Neuch^tel are not 
sufficiently known to English tourists, or rather to the wearied spirits of 
those whose activity has been brought to a standstill, and who must 
have rest and recreation before they can plunge again into the battle- 
field of life, with courage refreshed and spirits revived. The wonderful 
and magnificent limestone gorges, de TAreuse and du Covetannaz, and 
the splendid Crcux du Vent, arc well worth a long journey. 

Yvcrdon is a small town by no means devoid of attractions, and 
which would well reward a visit of a few days. But I intend here to 
speak less of scenery than of objects of living interest. Here is the fine 
towered castle where Pestalozzi gathered together the youthful sufferers 



Some Swiss Notes, 8i 

from the devastation of the great French irruption, and gave practical 
demonstration of the superiority of an intelligent, lively, and animated 
education of the faculties over the system of rote then most in vogue. 
They are about to raise a statue to him at Yverdon — to him whom they 
compelled, in 1825, to leave their town. The world persecutes many of its 
best benefactors, and after their death raises monuments to their memory. 
Under his successors the school degenerated considerably ; but it has 
now for many years been the centre of education for the youth of 
Yverdon, thousands of whom are under instruction in a very large 
number of rooms, courts, and halls — better employed in the mental 
cultivation of the young than in the warfare and bloodshed for which 
these massive walls and high round towers were first erected. The 
writer, conducted by M. NaefT, his former schoolfellow of half a century 
ago (now the courteous and able president of the Yverdon School 
Board), could not but be greatly impressed with the brightness, activity, 
and intelligence of the teachers, and the ready apprehension, willing 
obedience, and cheerful compliance with discipline shown by the 
children. The manuals employed (which, of course, were only sub- 
sidiary to the viva voce instruction, which always holds the highest place 
in real education) seemed to me to be of the best kind, examined and 
approved before adoption by superior authority. Everywhere in the 
Suisse Romande (that is, Neuch^tel, Vaud, and Geneva) the school 
buildings are very spacious, each class being always taught in a separate 
room even in the small villages, and not, as is still too. often the case in 
England in village schools, several classes going on noisily clashing 
tc^ether between the same four walls. 

In many Swiss towns the ancient fortified chateaux, once the scenes 
of endless strife and division, are now patriotically employed in the 
education of the rising generation. It has been often truly observed 
that Switzerland is the most highly educated country in Europe. But 
an unhappy qualification of this high, but justly deserved, praise must 
be pronounced — that Switzerland is also one of the most notorious for 
its intemperance. In the beautiful National Exhibition at Zurich in 
1883, it was surprising and painful to observe the large space devoted 
to the display not of wine only (at which we cannot be surprised), 

F 



82 HouDAY Studies, 

but of ardent spirits, which are extracted from several indigenous 
plants. 

Again, if education is to be really useful and a firm foundation of 
manly dignity, there must be books, magazines, periodicals, both cheap 
and popular, in suflficient abundance. This is just what Switzerland has 
not, and as long as she has nothing better to offer to her admirably 
educated youths than a very meagre proportion of wholesome literature 
and a pretty liberal supply of unwholesome trash, and worse than trash, 
pouring in from France, it is not much to be wondered at that the 
long winter evenings will be spent in rioting and drunkenness. At 
Lausanne and Geneva we had great difficulty in finding any kind of 
nice cheap periodicals for presents to servants, or to friends of the 
humbler class. At Geneva we sought for some time before we could 
discover the only shop in a by-street up a steep climb. Good literature 
seems as little prized in Switzerland as pure religion ; and if the more 
enlightened and patriotic desire the material and moral, but above all 
the religious, advancement of their country, they must labour strenuously 
to add a pure and manly religious, or at any rate not irreligious, literature 
to a rightly regulated education. In Switzerland education is called free ; 
and it is so in the sense that no poor persons are ever burdened with 
the expense of the education of their children. But as every household 
IS equitably rated, it so happens that those who have no children help to 
pay for those who have, while poor persons with large families find their 
burdens considerably lightened by this participation of responsibility. 
The result, with the sad drawback which I have mentioned, is singularly 
effective. In our walks over the Jura pastures and among the moun" 
tain forest paths, we generally took with us some of Mrs. Grimk^'s* 
beautiful and useful little illuminated cards in French and in Ger- 
man, and showing these to the children we met, promised that they 
should have them if they could read them. All read with fluency 
and intelligence, consequently the distribution was pretty large. Even 
a bare-footed little cowboy of ten, near Ste. Croi*, sonie 5,000 feet high, 
read them with perfect ease and a very good intonation. 

* Of Higher Broughton, Manchester, 



Some Swjss Notes. 83 

The great temperance movement is far from being unfelt in Switzer- 
land ; but its progress is slow, and accompanied with difficulty. At 
present it is so exclusively in the hands of " les plus avanc^s " in spiritual 
religion, that it is looked upon as a characteristic feature of the religious 
life ; and is almost altogether discountenanced in the £glise Nationale, 
in which to be too religious, that is to say openly religious at all, is 
generally and popularly accounted to be a mark of great weakness. It is 
much to be hoped that, by the blessing of God, a more decided feeling 
will sooner or later prevail in this fair land in favour of a practical 
Christianity according to the Word of God and not of man. Then it 
will be seen that a voluntary total abstinence adopted for example's sake 
is quite consistent with the exercise of a noble and reasonable religion. 
At any rate they might begin at infancy, and not give wine or beer, as is 
done almost universally, to infants of a year old. At present our bits of 
blue ribbon and the badge of the Church of England Temperance 
Society, often seen at table d'hdte, are looked upon with more wonder 
than admiration as new developments of British eccentricity. True it is 
that in a land of vines the question naturally arises : what about the 
grapes and the wine-making? But that is not so much the real question 
as how to get rid of the pernicious burning spirits they distil from the 
beautiful plants that clothe the land with splendour. No one would lose 
by letting the yellow gentian alone, which a girl (a tempirante of Ste. 
Croix) who was guiding us to the Chasseron described to us as trts 
nuisible. It is one of the greatest mistakes possible to say, as is so often 
said, that the water in Switzerland is so bad that one is obliged to drink 
wine. We never found the water otherwise than pure, sparkling, and 
perfectly delicious. An abundance of springs and streams bursts forth 
from the mountain-sides in all directions, and is poured forth almost in 
torrents from those excellent fountains for all domestic uses which arc 
seen in every place^ and two or three in every street. The Vaudois 
seldom drink their own pure and limpid spring-water. The more the 
pity. But this is no reason why English people should join in the false 
charge and deprecate the best of water as a common beverage. Still, 
go where we will, we do find English ladies and gentlemen at table 
d'h6te with their bits of blue trying to set a quiet and unostentatious 



84 Hon DAY Studies. 

example, and the movement which is of such recent growth in our own 
island will not tarry long before it enlists followers in the first health 
resort in Europe. 

In the museum kept in the Castle of Yverdon is a small object 
associated with terrible recollections. It is simply a card carrying on it 
three or four slips cut from the branches of a tree, with the bark and the 
wood ripped and scored, torn and blistered all over ; a sample of what 
all the trees were after the dreadful storm of 1877, as it was described to 
me by eye-witnesses. The north wind surged in terrible blasts, hovering 
with black wings over the ill-fated land. The dense sky descended like 
a low dark ceiling. The roaring and the bellowing of the wind drowned 
the incessant crash of thunder. Dense hail swooped down in masses of 
ice ; and in eight minutes every tree and every vine was stripped of all its 
foliage and fruit, which lay chopped and torn into smallest fragments 
on the ground a foot thick. In a quarter of an hour not only was all 
hope of a harvest destroyed for that year, but it took several years for 
the trees and the vines to recover. Such are the storms to which sub- 
Alpine regions are liable. 

It appears to me almost as if it were in England only that the Bible 
is really acknowledged as being both at the foundation of worship and 
in its superstructure ; though unquestionably its indirect and insensible 
influence is everywhere manifest among "all people who profess and 
call themselves Christians.*' At Lugano I wanted to purchase an Italian 
Testament. But not a single Bible or New Testament could I find in 
any bookseller's shop in the capital of the Tessin, though at last I met 
with a single copy at an obscure stationer's. At Meran, in the Tyrol, 
the servants, young women of fair education, did not even know the out- 
side of a Bible, never having seen one. Yet they loved their little 
devotional books and hymns which they showed me. In Protestant 
Switzerland, in the National Church, the Bible is very little used in the 
churches ; though in the Eglise libre, where there is far more spiritual 
life, a better state of things exists. Usually the service commences with 
the solemn reading of the Ten Commandments by the schoolmaster, 
followed by our Lord's summary of them, after which the sacred Book 



Some Sw/ss Notes. 85 

being no longer wanted, except to read the text from, is solemnly laid 
aside. I need hardly add that the matter of the sermon gains very 
little support or illustration from the words of Scripture. I report these 
personal observations not in a boastful spirit of vain censoriousness, but 
with a very deep regret that Swiss Protestantism owns so little in com- 
mon with primitive and apostolic Christianity. 



BAGNI DI BORMIO, 

During our three weeks' stay at Bagni di Bormio in the Valtelline, 
the vast mountain masses of the Stelvio were seen rising so steeply from 
the very grounds of the hotel, only a small portion being visible at a time, 
that our curiosity and interest were awakened in a very lively manner, 
not unmixed with anxiety and apprehension. For it was already 
September; and we were due at Meran for my chaplaincy on the 21st, 
and we were almost daily hearing unpleasant rumours of heavy falls of 
snow on the Stelvio, which at this season stops all communication by 
the Eastern Alps. If, unfortunately for us, the snow should have come 
down just at tliis juncture, we should have been compelled to undertake a 
long and expensive journey round by the Lake of Como and Verona. 

In June, 1882, a hundred labourers were kept at work for a month 
in clearing away snow from the road to keep the communication open. 
We therefore continually surveyed our colossal neighbour with an 
admiration not unmingled with awe and apprehension. By the end of 
September the Stelvio is always expected to be closed, and generally is 
so. We therefore had to keep a sharp look-out on the weather indica- 
tions, and to be ready to depart on the first notice of serious danger. 

Bagni di Bormio is a charming spot for a stay, either before or after 
crossing the Stelvio, and deserves a much higher appreciation than it 
has generally met with from tourists, bound either from Tyrol or for 
North Italy, who generally stay merely a night or two and pass on. 
Placed on an elevation of 4,396 feet above the sea-level, at the very head 
of the Valtelline, dominated by snowy and by rocky peaks, it enjoys the 
purest of air and some of the most magnificent of Alpine scenery, while 



85 Holiday Studies. 

the hotel accommodation is ever>'thing that the most fastidious Briton 
can reasonably desire. 

As it is an aim of mine to point out a few objects of interest which 
seem to have escaped others, I will here mention the wondrous and ad- 
mirable iron gates of Cepina, which have been overlooked both by Murray 
and Baedeker. Cepina is a small out-of-the-way village about four miles 
from Bagni di Bormio down the valley. It stands rather high above the 
right bank of the Adda, opposite to that along which runs the high road 
to Tirano, and must be reached, after passing it half a mile, by crossing 
the river over the stone bridge. In this poor village stands an ossuario 
or mortuary house, a small square building containing unusually good 
frescoes within and without, and closed in by a triad of the most lovely 
and precious gates in wrought iron. Their remoteness from the beaten 
track will account for the neglect with which these remarkable gates 
have been treated. This splendid specimen of sixteenth-century iron- 
work consists of three circular-headed gates, the middle one about twelve 
feet high, the side ones about two feet lower and divided by granite 
pillars. The workmanship of these gates is of the most exquisite, and 
what I may call without a strained aestheticism, the most tender, delicacy, 
and we stood long gazing at them, lost in delight and admiration. A 
gentle and loving hand would seem to have wrought out every detail 
with an elaborate lightness and elegance rarely paralleled. They are 
made chiefly of ribbon iron about two inches wide, and a quarter of an 
inch thick, the edges facing outward, blossoming out with an energy 
resembling that of organised life, into foliated forms, into flowers, bosses, 
knots and delicate pillars twisted into the very lines of perfect grace. 
The whole graceful design is of such exquisite lightness, artfully com- 
bined with boldness and vigour, that one has a difficulty in believing that 
every single portion was wrought with the hammer, of which the strokes 
are plainly visible, and never even touched with the file. To me, at any 
rate, it appeared strange that those gates, now 300 years old, should 
never have had one touch of paint or varnish, and yet exhibited not the 
slightest appearance of rust. The designer and the workmen, I was 
told, were all of the Valtelline. The contadini or villagers are justly 
proud of this unique possession, and had just refused the offer of 20,000 



Some Sw/ss Notes. Sy 

francs made by Mr. Astor, the United States Minister at Rome, who was 
staying at Bormio Baths at the same time with us. The frescoes painted 
outside are very fine and of marvellous freshness, a singular part of them 
being, however, a couple of skeletons, represented as mourning in company 
together, with a strong expression of inconsolable grief depicted on their 
fleshless faces. I do not know that I ever before sav/ eyeless orbits 
weeping. Certainly one would hardly look for work so lovely, in a wild 
and rather poverty-stricken land, where not a single other object of 
artistic worth is to be seen for many miles. I know of nothing whatever 
noteworthy nearer than Madonna di Tirano, where is a very beautiful 
pilgrimage church, with much rich carving in wood and marble* 

We cannot but lament the injury done to all decorative art by the too 
plentiful application of machinery. It is, I think, Lenormant who says, 
"L'art y a perdu,comme il perd presquc partout,ci Temploi des machines." 

Another interesting and little-known spot in this neighbourhood is 
the beautiful little mountain lake, Lago di Scale, about four miles from 
Bormio, and not noticed in Baedeker. You advance, continually ascend- 
ing, until you see loftily rising before you a vast perpendicular wall of 
red rock, some 500 or 600 feet high, through which you understand that 
you are to penetrate, by some way not as yet apparent, until the in- 
creasingly steep and rugged stony path brings you face to face with a 
long and deep natural fissure or gorge, riven through the highest ridge, 
and scarcely three yards in width, to which you ascend by means of a 
wooden bridge of the very rudest construction. Covering and guarding 
each vast buttress of this gorge, which is in reality a pass between Swiss 

• Writing of half-known or unknown places of antiquarian interest, let me here mention 
another valuable Alpine work of ancient religious art. Near Andermatt, close by the 
Unserenloch or Trou d'Uri, is the very ancient church of St. Columba, the priest of this wintry 
valley A.D. 632. The chancel is an irregular pentagon, not built straight with the nave. An 
old and rude oil painting in the sacristy of a Capuchin friar bears the inscription .... 
lODOCUS FILIUS REGIS ANGLIiE. ORD EREMIT. AUG. A heavy pulpit of 
granite bears a date resembling 1339 (j J JOV* which may probably be 1559. The font or holy- 
water basin, for it may be both, bears the monogram — which I do not profess to understand — 

H .M. R 

-f — 
F 



88 Holiday Studies, 

and Italian territory, stands an old square ruined tower. Threading the 
narrow defile, you debouch first into one narrow valley, then into 
another, wider and of great loveliness. The smooth hollow of the valley 
is filled with the stillest and most transparent of blue crystalline 
mountain lakes, a jewel in a picturesque setting of banks clothed with 
Pinus montana, and richly coloured, no doubt, earlier in the year with 
the dark pink blossoms of the so-called Alpine rose, which is in reality a 
rhododendron. This must be a rich hunting-ground for the botanist at 
the right season, as the dead and dying remains in the middle of 
September sufficiently attested. There were remains of Saxifraga 
CcesiUy the rich orange of Senecio abrotonifolius was still conspicuous, and 
on all the mountain-slopes around, the coveted Edelweiss. The richest 
pastures surround the head of the lake, which is between 6,000 and 7,000 
feet high, where snugly nestles the farm, lately purchased with the lake 
and mountains by M. de Planta, whose name is great in the Engadine, 
the proprietor of the hotels of the old and new baths at Bormio, and of 
many broad acres and pastoral mountains in the Grisons country. 
Strange to say, there lay in hopeless idleness, extended on the grassy 
bank, two Italian Custom-house officers, whose too easy duty is to accost 
the extremely few travellers who use this unfrequented pass to cross 
from the Swiss Grisons into the Italian Valtelline, and inquire whether 
they happen to have any " cigarri o tabacchi " about them : a form 
through which they of course went in our case also, to whom smoking is 
an accomplishment unknown ! I tried to have a chat with the poor 
lonely fellows, which my very limited knowledge of Italian brought to 
too early a close. 

Standing by the side of this lake the surrounding prospect is mag- 
nificent with Alpine domes, cones, and peaks in every direction, the 
grand Bemina masses in Switzerland, and the Adamello range in Italy 
standing out sharply and brilliantly conspicuous against the dark blue. 

Even in this remote and desolate spot is a little chapel, how and 
when used I am unable to say. It was not open as churches generally are 
in Italy, but as is usual in lonely spots, a grated window opening is left 
on each side of the door, with a stone kneeling-place under it, for such 

• 

worshippers as desired to behold the altar within. Churches abound in 



Some Siviss Notes. 89 

all the Valtelline and the adjacent Tyrol. You find them everywhere, 
on mountain summits,. in silent forests, by rushing torrents, in lonely 
gorges and passes; wherever there are two or three houses within the 
distance of a couple or so of miles, there we shall be certain to find a 
church, besides the numberless painted shrines, pictures, crosses, and 
crucifixes which you meet at every half-mile. Never have I seen one of 
these religious memorials defaced or irreverently used. They stand in 
.perfect security against injury for centuries. We of the reformed faith 
might, if we would, learn lessons from the reverence of these people, who 
generally look upon us as the Chinese do upon European barbarians. 
But in our desire to clear ourselves from every taint of superstition, we 
have perhaps thrown away with too little discrimination the good with 
the bad. We seldom went into a church without finding someone in 
devout or at any rate silent prayer, and what the French so well call 
recueillemenL ' 

The simple piety and artless affection for their pastors felt by these 
Alpine folk seemed pleasantly illustrated to us by the following in- 
scriptions, which I copied from the front of a church and on the priest's 
house at Hospenthal, at the foot of the road over the St. Gothard. A 
new priest had just been appointed. 

Before the church : — 

'' Wie sich zum Kranz umschlingen. 
Die frischen Zweige hier 
Wird Eintracht dich umringen 
Im Volk ergeben dir. 

Vom lieben Gott beschieden, 
Zu spenden Gottes Frieden 
Und Himmelstrost im Leben. 
Bist du hier uns gegeben.'' 

Before the presbytery : — 

*• Komm und bewahre gut deine Heerde, 
Sei herzlich willkommen du Seelenhirte." 

A favourite and exceedingly fine excursion from Bormio is to St. 
Caterina, at the long and narrow head of the Furva valley. Half-way, 
at St. Nicolo, is an exhibition which is no help to devotion ; a mortuary 



90 Holiday Studies. 

chapel, rather let us call it a bone and charnel house, in which the 
example of pure taste set at Cepina has not been followed. The valley 
ends at the Baths of St Caterina, and from this terminus none go 
further, except with guides, over the lofty and somewhat dangerous 
passes among snow-fields and glaciers. 

The fairest, noblest peak in sight is Monte Tresero, shining 
lustrously, like frosted silver, in the brilliant Italian sunshine, with a 
dazzling whiteness with which no other white can vie, certainly not the 
fairest, purest swansdown, for owing to the abundance of white light 
reflected from the glittering surface, no shadows are thrown. It rises 
before me still as a vividly remembered picture, set in the dainty 
sapphire blue of a cloudless southern sky, and shaded at every softly 
swelling fold, and at every sharp-cut ridge, by the blended shadows of 
pale blue and silver greys of varying depth and hue, thrown by a brilliant 
sun, dappled and flecked with darker ledges and blocks of isolated out- 
cropping rocks. Then lower down between the lines of 7,000 and 8,000 
feet, above the line of glacial action, lie spread the gently undulating 
Alpine pastures, with the little brown pine-built ch&lets or sennhiitte 
dropped here and there with a charming variety. Then the eye ranges 
down to the region of the dark and solemn forests of pine, intersected 
here by the long silver streaks of roaring torrents, there by the shepherd's 
and the woodman's forest-path — forests whose serried crowds of deep- 
grecn-pointed spires are relieved from a too great and wearisonrie 
monotony by the gentle dips and depressions of the mountain-sides and 
the vacant grassy interspaces, green and smooth at this distance, appa- 
rently, as an English lawn. Lastly, the bright green valley, with its rude 
imperfect cultivation, its brawling torrent of grey glacier water, its poor 
and half-ruined villages, not one, however small, without its old Italian 
towered church, enriched with frescoed walls, and its little wayside shrines 
and crucifixes. 

Bormio is an antiquated, decaying, and squalid town of scarcely i,ooo 
inhabitants. The main street is just fifteen feet wide, with a gutter 
running down its centre, with no pavement, and not the slightest 
approach to lighting. The shops display scarcely any frontage, and one 
has to find out what is sold in them by inquiry. Even the chemist knew 



Some Sw/ss Notes, 91 

not a word of any living language but Italian. The post office is closed 
for the greater part of the day, and stamps are sold at the grocer's, but 
there is no certainty about them. Poor as the place is otherwise, it has 
many churches. In each confessional box is hung up for the con- 
fessor's guidance a graduated schedule of sins, the first sin in the 
first class being the frequenting of the conventicles of the heretics, 
especially during the preaching. For the first offence the priest may 
give absolution. But with the second offence none but the Archbishop 
of Como may deal. Perhaps this severity is a survival of the persecu- 
tions of the Waldenses. 

The infant school is held in a gloomy ancient tower, built almost 
wholly of stone and iron ; and the little children, the girls with full skirts 
reaching down to their feet, and the little boys in rags and tatters, have 
no playground but a yard paved with hard round pebbles. Women 
wear short skirts, with only a handkerchief upon the head ; all little girls 
wear long skirts that hide their little feet, making them look like diminu- 
tive women. In the by-streets we saw many women employed in 
spinning flax with that most ancient spindle one sees in antique paint- 
ings, which hangs revolving suspended in the air from one hand, while 
with the other the worker spins out the thread. In all things Bormio 
gives you the impression that you are in a mediaeval city, undisturbed 
as yet by the scream of the locomotive, and the roar of the trains on the 
irpn roads, which had not (in 1883) yet come within fifty miles of this 
profoundly sleeping community to disturb the slumber of centuries. 
Beggary is, of course, a popular means of livelihood ; children run kissing 
their hands after any stranger who looks at all likely to respond to their 
plaintive cry of" Caritdy caritd!** In one place a child of four or five 
came running after our carriage, kissing her little hand continually until 
she got a few cetitimeSy when an ugly vicious-looking cretin girl darted 
out from behind a hedge, pounced upon the poor baby, gripped her, 
shook her, lifted her from the ground, and shook her again to get her 
treasure from the child's clenched hand, but all to no purpose, for the 
child never relaxed her grip, until she saw a man running down to the 
rescue, upon which the cretin let go, and came full speed after us again, 
looking the picture of injured innocence, and beseeching for "r^r//rf.'" 



92 HouDAY Studies, 

Cretinism is a horrible pest in the Valtelline, a judgment upon the people 
{or their filthy ways. Monstrous throats are seen in every village, and 
yet with ordinary compassionate care this loathsome disease is easily 
curable, and more easily preventible, and might certainly be eradicated 
altogether by attention to a few simple sanitary rules. 

1883. 



Zbc Stelvio pase. 



The Stelvio Pass. 

History of the Great Road — Ascent on Fool — Alpine compared wiih English Lake Sceneiy — 
The Tunnels and Galleries — Hot Springs of Bormlo— Dolomite— Long Waterfalls— The 
SpondalungJt— Fighting in 1858— The Zigzags — Cold barren R^ion— Home Cristallo— 
Fourth Canloniire — Summit — View over the Ortler Range — Sublime Scenery— 1(» Effect 
on Different Minds— Down to Traibi— The Murilerer Tourrille— The Madatsch Glaciers by 
Night and by Sunrise— Ruskin on Alpine Scenery — The "Three Holy Springs" — The 
Church lE Trafoi — Descent to Meian. 

^E'went up the Stelvio three times — once on foot half-way up 
and back to Bagni di Bormio to dinner in the evening ; the 
second time, we walked to the summit, slept at the fourth 
Cantoni^rc, and returned next day, also on foot ; the third 
time was on our happy walking tour to Meran, when we 
went up in the voiture paste, and walked down on the 
Austrian side to Trafoi. Having thus stated what were my various 
opportunities, such as they were, for the exploration of this stupendous 
mountain pass, I will proceed to describe it to the best of my power. 

The grand Stelvio road commences gently to rise just after leaving 
Bormio, from which it ascends continually by windings and zigzags to 
Ferdinandshdhe, the summit, where there is no level space and the 
descent commences at once. To this point, called also Stilfserjoch, 
Passo di Braulio, and Giogo di Stelvio, is a distance from Bormio by 
road of fifteen miles. Thence it descends continually by innumerable 
windings twenty miles further to Prad, where it debouches in the Valley 
of the Vintschgau, at the river Adige. Therefore, from foot to foot is a 
distance by road of thirty-four miles. 

Bormio, where the rise commences, is 4,012 feet above the level of 
the sea; the summit is 9,045 feet; the ascent is therefore of 5,033 feet. 
Prad is 2,940 feet high, so that the descent is 6,105 fc^t ; and the Italian 
foot is higher by I/D72 feet than the Tyrolese. 

We learn something of the history of this colossal work from a large 
marble tablet let into the rock just between the high wooden bridge and 



96 Holiday Studies. 

the first short tunnel, a little above the hotel. It was constructed by 
order of Francis I., Emperor of Austria, P.F.A.,* and is stated to have 
been made from Bormio to A thesis,] over the pass of the Braulio^ which 
is the name of the torrent that rises in the mountain and joins the Adige 
at Premadio. It is here stated to be the highest pass in Europe for 
carriage traffic, to have been begun in 1820 and opened in 1825 by Arch- 
duke Rainer. Then follow the names of the architect, Charles Doneganni, 
the contractor, and others. Five years seem but a short time for so 
colossal a work ; but a large part of the army was employed upon it in 
a time of peace. 

Before the Stelvio road was made, there was no possibility of passing 
this mountain at all, except on foot by the most adventurous moun- 
taineers ; and to reach the Valtelline from the Vintschgau upon wheels, 
the only way was to ride from Trafoi, on the Tyrolese side, by excessively 
rough and steep tracks to the fourth and highest Cantoniire, where a 
road still used takes one over the Umbrail Pass or Wurmserjoch, about 
1,000 feet lower than the Stilfserjoch, on to Santa Maria, in the Miinster- 
thai ; then over the Buffalora and Ofener Passes to Zemetz, up the 
Lower Engadine and Pontresina, over the Bemina Pass, and so down 
into Italy at Tirano, a long journey of nearly 120 miles instead of the 
odd twenty. The Austrian Government wished to purchase the Pass of 
Santa Maria to carry their road through it, but the Government of the 
Grisons refused, compelling the Austrian engineers to penetrate a region 
hitherto unknown except to the goat-herd and the chamois-hunter. 
From Austria the military road lay through Innsbruck, over the Brenner 
Pass by Botzcn to Verona. Some idea of the difficulty of the mountain 
roads before Napoleon I. taught on the St. Bernard how to construct 
military roads over great mountain passes, may be obtained by observa- 
tion of the excessively rough, rocky, and steep ox-cart roads and mule- 
tracks still used in preference over the mountain passes for the ordinary 
traffic of the peasantry. I have seen a team of oxen resting for a minute 
at the foot of some steep, terribly stiff bit of road on bare uneven rock, 
and then, in their quiet, dull, patient way, pull up it a heavy load of 

• PII. FELICIS. AUGUSTI : a frequent attribute of Roman Catholic Emperore. 
t The Adige or Etsch, so called by Strabo. 



The Stelvio Pass. 97 

timber or stone without the least apparent eflfort or distress. In the 
same way they would get a heavily-laden cart over the St. Gothard or 
the Brenner. Stout little packhorses, heavily laden, and generally headed 
by a white animal, will walk by themselves over such places, the peasant 
drivers slowly trudging before them. 

As for the Stelvio, the descent to Bormio, even on foot, would, I 
presume, have been impracticable, except perhaps during the height of 
summer, close by the river bed, on account of the enormous buttresses 
of rock which barrier the mountain side, protruding straight down to the 
rushing Braulio, all of which are now pierced, tunnelled, or ledged and 
terraced, for the passage of the road. 

After the forced cession by the Austrians of Lombardy to Italy in 
i860, there ceased to be any inducement for the Empire of the two- 
headed eagle to keep up the road, a work of heavy expense after the 
destructive agency of winter has been in- operation, and it fell into dis- 
repair. By degrees, however, the Italian Governments, conscious of its 
importance, kept their side of it in better order, and now, under the rule 
of a united Italy, it is rarely, for the three or four summer months that 
it is open, to be found otherwise than in good repair. 

Let us now on foot begin the ascent of the famous pass. We shall 
not by any means use the great road all the way ; certainly not the 
grand semi-circular sweep from the hotel to the first bridge, where the 
engineers, with a studied regard to the picturesque, have left standing a 
huge dark natural obelisk of rock, forty feet high. Perhaps we shall not 
use more than a third or a fourth of it, either in ascending or descending, 
as the short cuts between one sharp angle in the road and another are so 
numerous that a good walker, starting at the same time with the coach, 
could easily reach the summit the first. 

In these lower reaches of the road wc are upon the battle-ground of 
the Garibaldian irregulars with the Austrian troops in 1859, when first 
the Austrians, then the patriots, held the large buildings of the ancient 
and the modern Baths, and made them into barracks, when the wooden 
bridge was cut down, and after much fighting in these awful gorges the 
Imperial troops were driven back in wild confusion and with great loss, 
destroying behind them the third Cantoniorc, which is still lying in ruins. 

G 



98 Holiday Studies, 

On the left, deep down below, lies the gloomy gorge of the foaming, 
tossing Braulio, whence rise abruptly, at an angle of forty-five degrees, 
the bare, torrent-furrowed flanks of the Scale. Fresh as we were from 
our own mountain home, the change from the tender grace and exquisite 
refined loveliness of the sweet scenery of our own land of blue lakes and 
wild heather-clad fells to the grim and gloomy grandeur of the colossal 
masses amongst which we were now moving could not but be accom- 
panied with those emotions which no one who is wise will endeavour to 
transfer from the recesses of his own mind to the inaccessible depths of 
another's. I only wish to say that I have no sympathy with those who 
can return from the mighty storm-beaten Alps to depreciate by com- 
parison the less sublime, but perhaps far more really beautiful, scenery 
at home. 

We rise rapidly by the cuts, slowly by the road, which I feel certain 
could be easily traversed by means of the modern admirable invention 
of the bicycle or the tricycle, which, we learn from letters in the 
Times^ have been used with perfect success in crossing the Brenner and 
other passes. The galleries or tunnels are boldly pierced through the 
opposing buttresses which used to make this vast ravine impassable — 
tunnels dark, dripping, and sloppy after every fall of rain or summer snow. 
Underneath one a torrent from the mountain rushes down with much noise, 
scientifically carried harmlessly through ; in another the dark passage 
curves round, and is therefore doubly gloomy, though in most of them 
there are lateral apertures to let in a little light, through which we look 
down the deep gorge. Where they are roofed in with massive beams 
it is for the purpose of carrying the avalanches of snow, or the torrents 
of boulders and fragments over them, and the roof is therefore carefully 
laid at the same inclination as the mountain-side above, so as to offer no 
impediment to the sliding ruin. The tunnels, seven in number, and 
measuring in all 2,220 feet, or about half a mile, are all between the 
wooden bridge and the gorge of the Braulio, within a space of four or 
five miles. The rest of the way there are no tunnels. 

Towering up on the left is a dolomite mountain. The hot springs of 
Bormio burst out in nine places from within the yellow cavernous rock 
of magncsian limestone, which is named after the Genevese geologist 



The Stelvio Pass. 99 

Dolomieu.* Probably this mountain contains within its depths a great 
lake of mineral water, issuing warm and wholesome in the neighbour- 
hood, which hence is called Bagni di Bormio. 

We sit and rest on a flower-enamelled bank, and watch the long 
water-falls for ever streaming down the opposite perpendicular mountain, 
" those bold, those bright, those sky-blue water-falls.*' The dolomite lime- 
stone only caps the slate of which the Stelvio mountains consist, and the 
streams which gush out from the mountain flow from the junction of the 
limestone with the talc slate. The former, ochreous-tinted, cavernous, 
and pitted, lies immediately upon the scarred, furrowed, and contorted 
layers of dun grey slate, which lie closely wedged upon one another with 
the regular order of courses of masonry, but twisted and corrugated^ rent 
and furrowed with long deep vertical gashes, like the well-known twisted 
rocks by the Lake of Lucerne. These long thin streams, falling i,ooo 
feet sheer almost vertically, form a very pretty study of Nature. That 
which I see before me breaks out from the junction of the slate and the 
dolomite as a broad wavy ribbon of silver, widening and shallowing as it 
descends, here turned aside by interposing ledges of rock, gently curving 
there or abruptly bending, and finally spreading out into a beautiful 
fan-shaped filmy veil, gracefully floating in air, a perpetually varying, 
slowly descending stream of gauzy liquid silver. 

The great distance between the observer and the falling water gives 
rise to an illusion, the stream appearing to descend silently, slowly, and 
at leisure, in a manner which would be exchanged for din, and hurry, 
and fury if we could stand just before it. This majestic silent calmness is 
observable in any great water- fall seen from a distance, f and it is very 
noticeable in the inajestic long water-fall of Piz Languard, near Pon- 
tresina, which, after issuing from the mountain-top with its accurate 
curve of projection, conveys no sense of velocity, and is accompanied 
with no noise of falling water. 

• By the Fonte Pliniana, situated at the entrance of the deep gorge of the Braulio, in the 
warm rock, grow patches of a minute maiden^hair fern, called, I understand, Adiantum 
bormUnse^ a distinct species, and found elsewhere only in Southern Italy. It is much to be 
desired that the small quantity there is should be protected from wanton and useless depredation. 

t Murray is surely in error in calling this water-fall the source of the Adda, which descends 
the Val di Fraele. 



loo Holiday Studies. 

The dolomite not only caps the talc slate ; it also overhangs it Is 
this light, cavernous, and tufaceous formation actually harder and better 
able to resist the constant wear of atmospheric action than the laminated 
slate? I suppose it must be so, for the crumbled fragments that lie in 
conical heaps at the base consist only of ddbris of shattered slate, not of 
dolomite. 

With the valuable help of our alpenstocks, and with the lightest 
possible vnpedimenta^ we toil upwards past the dank and dismal tunnels 
and wooden galleries, wondering at the vast overhanging ponderous 
masses of rock, peering over precipitous ledges into the furious foaming 
torrent of the Braulio, a thousand feet below — the vast and awful 
torrent-furrowed precipices of Monte Braulio rising from the impetuous 
river's bed bluff, sheer, and sharp into the bright blue sky. 

" Brook and road 
Were fellow-travellers in this gloomy pass. 
And with them did we journey several hours 
At a slow step. The immeasurable height 
Of woods decaying, never to be decayed, 
The stationary blast of water-falls, 
And in the narrow rent, at every turn, 
Wmds thwarting winds, bewildered and forlorn, 
The torrents shooting from the clear blue sky, 
The rocks that muttered close upon our ears, 
Black drizzling crags that spake by the wayside 
As if a voice were in them, the sick sight 
And giddy prospect of the raving stream. 
The unfettered clouds and region of the heavens, 
Tumult and peace, the darkness and the light. 
Were all like workings of one mind, the features 
Of the same face, blossoms upon one tree, 
Characters of that great Apocalypse, 
The types and symbols of Eternity, 
Of first, and last, and midst, and without end." 

Wordsworth. 

The first Cantoni6re is passed, a rambling and deserted-looking place, 
and the second, which the Austrians left in ruins and has never been re- 
built. It is getting colder and colder as we reach the road-makers' huts; 
and here we arrive at a singular portion ofour journey, called the Sponda- 
lunga, or long wall. We are at the foot of a wide-extended, almost 



The Stelvio Pass, loi 

regular inclined plane, free from rocks and ravines, across whose bleak 
and barren face the road is cut in manifold long zigzags, of which from a 
point about half-way up we can count the nineteen acute angles. The 
coach occupies a considerable time in traversing all this long series of 
sides of isosceles triangles, while we steeply and laboriously climb up 
their bases on one side of the sloping plane, covering it in half the time 
that the horses take. The loose and broken soil is here richly carpeted 
with the beautiful Dryas octopetala, pretty common in altitudes over 6,000 
feet In the late autumn, the higher slopes are glowing with great crim- 
son patches of, I think, Rhododendron intermedimn ; but it had long been 
out of flower, and I may be mistaken. Looking far away down the gorge 
by which we came up, we see the black mouths of the seven tunnels, 
and their grim-looking port-holes, looking very much like the batteries 
in the rock of Gibraltar, or the pierced galleries of the Lake of Lucerne. 

On the Spondalunga took place a severe engagement between the 
Austrian and the Garibaldian troops on July loth, 1859. The former, 
mostly hardy Tyrolese jiigers from Meran, had encamped for two nights 
on the snowy steeps of Monte Cristallo, with no better covering than 
their woollen rugs. Advancing down the pass, on reaching the long zig- 
zags they could see the Italian leaders emerging from the tunnels, and 
planted their guns in the long upper reaches of the road. The Italians 
from below fired disadvantageously at long range the whole day, but 
their shot fell far short, and they lost about sixty men, while their 
enemy's loss was but one or two. There was very little fighting at close 
quarters.* But it was after all a wasted battle, as the armistice had 
been concluded the day before, though the news of it had not yet reached 
the opposing forces. 

Having cleared these great zigzagged slopes, we arrive in a cold and 
barren region, where wide-extending fields piebald with snow begin to 
appear, and reach a desolate table-land, bordered by the dull glaucous 
green slopes below Piz Umbrail on the left, and the long and graceful 
gently-descending sweeps of Monte Cristallo on the right, with its more 

• This information was communicated to me by the Rev. Father Paul, a Benedictine of 
Meran, who was present as chaplain to a detachment consisting of students from the gymnasium 
and of peasants and Tyrolese jagers. 



I02 Holiday Studies. 

abrupt and broken glacier front This beautiful mountain remains an 
object of remarkable grace and loveliness all the remaining way to the 
summit, its delicately outlined cones cleaving, the pale blue sky at a 
wide angle which combines consummate loveliness with the most majestic 
splendour. 

But there is no beauty in the uninteresting foreground. Here all is 
bleak and barren. Besides the rank grass, hardly any signs of vegetation 
are to be seen, except the great ragged thorny thistles {Cirsium lanceo- 
latum) scattered in lonely clumps about the stony banks. In this valley 
of desolation is the third Cantonifere, affording rude shelter and coarse 
refreshment. A little way further on is the little chapel of Santa Maria, 
with the priest's poor abode at its side. Even near the summit of the 
bleak and once terrible Stelvio, a poor but sufficient chapel and its 
resident priest I Would it be inconsistent with the principles of the 
Reformed Faith to provide the means of grace everywhere^ where the 
three or four might be gathered together in answer to whose prayers the 
promised blessing would descend } 

Up higher we see the yet distant white walls of the better known and 
more frequented fourth Cantonitre of Santa Maria, quite close to the 
Swiss frontier, where we spent one bitter cold night in the middle of 
September. The visitors to the Ortler Spitze, and to Piz Umbrail 
especially, have all enjoyed the rude but hearty hospitality of the fourth 
Cantonierc, and the leathery tasteless cakes called bread, and rejoiced 
perhaps in the refreshing, invigorating chill of winter in the midst of the 
summer heat which fiercely beats on the green valleys below. 

I can say nothing of Piz Umbrail except at second-hand. We had 
intended to ascend it, no difficult matter even for elderly folks ; but there 
was a bitter and violent cold wind blowing, to be encountered only by 
limbs and lungs of youthful vigour. All that we saw therefore of this 
famous spectacular ridge was its long, black, sharply serrated edge; and 
instead, we resolved to continue our walk to the summit of the pass, a 
distance of two miles further by the road, and an ascent of i,ooo feet. 
Here the zigzags are at their widest and their sharpest, and we found 
snow-drifts by the road-side ten feet deep, the road frozen hard, and long 
icicles hanging from the rocks. The short cuts arc over the rockiest, 



The Stelvio Pass, 103 

roughest ground in the whole ascent ; but we are pleased to find the 
shaggy, purple Ranunculus glacialis peeping out beside us through the 
snow. Many rare Alpine plants are to be found here by those who may 
have time to look for them. The red rocks of the Rothli Spitze over- 
hang the left of the road, and the lovely prolonged stretches of the snow 
plains of Cristallo and Scorluzzo still crown the southern horizon with 
beauty unspeakable. These are the lofty Alpine heights where it never 
rains, and all the moisture from above descends either as finely-powdered 
snow, drifting before the wild winds, or in quieter weather, crystallising in 
six-rayed stars. Nor does the snow here ever melt. It only evaporates, 
or, partially melting, goes to form the mighty glacier. " Das ist alter Eis," 
said a guide to me, to distinguish the glacier from the adjacent snow. , 

At last we stand upon the summit, having attained our object easily, 
and without any danger whatever, which I mention, simply because, 
in common with many other inexperienced mountaineers, we had enter- 
tained vague ideas as if the magnificent Stelvio route was now as it was 
in times past, and not a beautiful summer excursion to be enjoyed on 
foot, and without the slighest necessity for a guide. 

The wind is keen and cutting as we reach the square, grey, granite 
monument which crowns the summit, inscribed with the words " Tirol," 
" Lombardo," and which marks the boundary of the Austrian and the 
Italian dominions. There are not a dozen yards of level ground here. 
As soon as you have done ascending, if you are going on, you must 
begin to descend. Here stands the highest inhabited house in Europe, 
occupied by a road surveyor. But on this particular occasion when we 
paused to take in the inexpressible grandeur of the prospect on the 
Tyrolese side, we were not going on, but sat down in a sheltered nook 
on Austrian ground to try to photograph the scene in our memories. 

Before us lies spread a vast circuit of towering, snow-crowned Alps, 
the monarch of them all — the imperial Ortler, 12,814 feet high, and the 
highest mountain in Germany — standing out loftily above the inferior, 
yet scarcely less stately, dominations. The Ortler is often spoken of as 
a snowy dome. But this description is scarcely accurate, the globular 
summit being broken by many black and jagged ridges. The range is 
broken with frowning, beetling crags, scored transversely with huge 



J04 HouDAY Stvz^ies. 

\fzf\%ns of rock fsuppr/Tim:^ immensely deep masses of snow and ice. 
Unf/TTn^ms buttresses of bare, black rock separate from each other three 
fct/x-pj/'j/ffxipJious icc'torrcnts, of a <h:nmg steel blue, in places glowing 
with the very peculiar luminous glow-worm glimmerings of green of which 
I cyuld not explain the ory^iih These ice-torrents hang suspended motion- 
lc»i» on the vast [Xjqxrndicular flanks of the Ortler and the Madatsch, un- 
utterably sublime and beautiful, with quite enough of the terrible to send 
a thrill of awe through the innermost soul of the beholder. They rise 
Urfore us, wall alx^ve wall, terrace upon terrace, irregular and broken, 
with htAicT and with dccixrr shades of green, like the unfathomable sea, or 
liluc like the vault of heaven, and seeming, in their vertical descent, as if 
lliey had l>ecn arrested in mid-career; but at times break off with a loud 
roar, descending m ten thousand fragments into the moraines beneath. 

'Ihe glaciers apj>car to be slowly melting below under the summer 
lu;at, but faster than they can be reinforced from above by accretions 
of winter snow and ice ; and it is commonly remarked that the glaciers 
(rv<:ry where seem to be receding year by year. There runs the dark 
irnj;iilar line which show^s where the ice is abruptly broken off, and where 
th<! ijrey glacier-torrent streams forth from beneath its icy caverns, and 
around its ed^es, with the incessant roar of multitudinous waters, making 
U|) in number what they lack in bulk. If we want to know what the 
Al|)s once were, we hjive only to see what Greenland and Labrador are 
now. The slow revolutions which are for ever changing the face of our 
|)lan(*t, are all illustrated in some part or another of the manifold pages 
of till! book of Nature. 

A very charming but peculiar feature of the scene was the constant 
swirling of powdery snow over all the distant mountain summits, lifted 
u|) like a \\^\\i gau/y veil into the transparent blue by the violent action 
of the eddying wind. Drifting spicuhe of this fine snow-dust were blown 
ajjainsl our faces as we sat in our cosy nook; and down the long slopes 
nf Moult* Crist.illo, the pure and down-like eddying wreaths of snow, all 
in gentle motion, tiescribed the most beautiful figures imaginable. 

Isu', very far away, down in the valley, appear the green pastures 
and the dark pine forests of Tyrol. But they do little to lessen the 
suhlinu* wiUlncss of the Alpine scene. 



The Stelvio Pass^ 105 

The St. Gothard, the finest pass in Switzerland, is 6,936 feet high. 
The St. Bernard, the least interestirtg in point of scenery, perhaps the 
most interesting from its associations, is 8,120; the Stelvio is 9,213, and 
therefore more than a thousand feet higher than the highest carriage 
road.in Switzerland. 

The extraordinary grandeur of the scene eastward from the summit 
is deeply impressive, and most memorable. One asks oneself the 
question, and not in vain, why a spectacle combining every character of 
bleak and barren desolation, a wide, waste wilderness of huge precipices 
. and perilous glaciers, lapped one over another, should fill the mind above 
all other sentiments with a true, pleasing sense of beauty. Upon a 
couple of tippling, slow-witted Germans and the dull mechanical driver, 
who, to our sorrow, were our sole companions driving up the pass, in our 
third and last journey, the features of the scenery made no more im- 
pression than Salisbury Plain would have made. Once a stolid being of 
this description was my companion in a walk up my much-loved Duddon 
valley, which he had never seen before. But as he seemed to take no 
special notice of anything, I called his attention to the noble Walla- 
barrow crag, one of the most imposing rocks in Great Britain. He 
looked up without the faintest intimation of interest,' and remarked, 
" I think I have seen bigger ones abroad ! " 

Cultivation and natural refinement are essential to the reception 
into the mind of most of the higher feelings of our nature. But is the 
world made for maq alone, as its noblest creature ? Are we, indeed, the 
highest intelligences that people this earth ? And are the unnoticed 
flowers of the wilderness, and the glittering gems of the secret mine, 
made to delight none but human eyes which may never rest upon 
them } Nay, but it is reasonable to believe, although from the nature of 
the case it is incapable of proof, that millions of beings, superior to 
ourselves, unseen, unheard, perhaps not unfelt, may people the air, 
float in ether, enjoy the liquid lapse of the bubbling torrent, and inhabit 
the woods, the mountains, the glaciers with an infinitely higher appre- 
ciation of the wonders of creation than we purblind mortals enjoy even 
at our best. Therefore I may be allowed to believe that the ice-torrents 
of the Ortler, and the dark precipices that buttress its towering crags and 



io5 Holiday Studies. 

pinnacles, and the celestial bcryl-like and azure spaces that seem to float 
over some of the crevasses, are beheld by more than ourselves, with a 
higher appreciation, and form a majestic temple wherein God is daily 
and hourly worshipped with hymns of praise, of which we may, if we are 
devout believers, catch some faint echoes. 

Let us descend from this cold eminence. Take away the road with 
its fifty zigzags to Trafoi, " using up " eleven miles and covering just six, 
and I cannot see how we should get down alive at all, the descent being 
excessively steep, and forming an angle with the horizon, I should say, 
of 40^, while 35^ is the utmost limit at which it is possible to climb on 
hands and knees, or to descend without support The grand road, how- 
ever, has been constructed with such an infinity of sharp zigzags, lapping 
so closely together, taking every advantage afforded by the configuration 
of the ground, that carriages, without locking a single wheel, can bowl 
all the way down merrily at a cheerful trot. So at least we saw our own 
conveyance going down for a long while after we had gladly taken .our 
leave of it. Such is the road just above the spot from which Tourville, 
in 1876, threw down his unhappy wife into the torrent below, of which the 
e.xact spot is marked by a black and white cross by the roadside.* 

Very few short cuts are available, and we find it far better to follow 
the windings, except in three or four places. But these windings become 
very tedious on arriving near Trafoi, our destination for the next two 
nights, which, though we can see the pretty little nestling Alpine village 
only half a mile off, far below us, we shall not be able to reach without 
walking from side to side for two or three miles. We were much struck 
with the difference in the vegetation in descending on the Tyrolese side, 
which was both more varied and more abundant. 

During the whole descent the towering masses of the Ortler and the 
Madatsch ranges bound the view on our right. The left side attracts no 
attention by picturesque beauty, but looks down upon us sternly and 
forbiddingly. My botanical case fills rapidly here in the different flora 

* This abominable wretch was tried at Botzen, found guilty, and, by the special clemency of 
the Emperor, sentenced to fifteen years' penal servitude ! Ikfore his committal he had the 
remains of his victim buried in the Protestant Frudehof oi Meran, and a pompous monument 
erected over them. I have just lately seen that he has died in a penitentiary. 



The Stelv/o Pass, 107 

of the eastern side of the Stelvio, and I pass the number of 150 species 
new to me, found, examined, and named, unknown or rare as indigenous 
to England. As we descend past Franzenshohe and the level of 7,000 
feet, about half-way down we meet, with a feeling of comfort, a warmer 
temperature, and pursue our interesting way through the pine forests, 
reaching valleys carpeted with a richer verdure and enamelled with 
gayer flowers. And so we reach Trafoi, having descended nearly 4,000 
feet, or a distance of eleven miles by road, and about six in a direct 
line. Here we find our luggage arrived in perfect safety, and the 
custom-house officer not in the least disposed to trouble us or himself 
to open our trunks. He takes my word for it, with a good-natured 
smile, that I have nothing to declare, and continues to smoke his pipe 
in peace undisturbed. The comfort of the inn (chiefly comfortable, 
however, to optimists like ourselves), and the loveliness of the situation, 
dispose us to stay two or three days, as there is no particular hurry to reach 
Meran. True, the wash-basins are like pie-dishes ; the towels like 
pocket-handkerchiefs ; and the bread like chamois leather ; but we have 
bid farewell on crossing the Stelvio to the hard pillows of Italy. Our 
bedroom commands most magnificent views, and the landlady, Frau 
Ortler, " of that ilk," and the maidens are all good-tempered. 

No landscape can be more picturesque than that in which the small 
village of Trafoi is situated. We saw it all to perfection from our windows, 
under a rather novel aspect, at two in the morning, under the bright 
silvery light of the full moon, and again just before sunrise. The best 
bedroom has four windows looking out, two over the Ortler, two over 
the lower ranges. At 2 a.m. the cold pale rays of moonlight flood the 
gleaming glaciers and their fretted edges with a sheen like that of 
molten silver. Between the great glaciers or Ferners of the Madatsch, 
the Ortler, and the Trafoier Ferner, bright almost as day, rise grim and 
terrible the vast black buttresses of rock, and, dark chief of all, the 
Madatsch Spitze, which I am surprised to learn has been conquered by 
the hardy Alpine climbers, rising sharply to the height of the glaciers, 
and with only one or two ledges apparent at this distance. A dark and 
pinnacled tower, it abruptly divides two great ice cataracts. Before sun- 
rise we were up again, to marvel in a kind of ccstacy at the same view 



io8 Holiday Studies, 

glorified and sublimed by the rising majesty of the sun. First one fine 
point of snow kindled a glowing beacon light, then another burst into a 
ruddy flame. Then another, and another p3inted summit assumed the 
radiant rosy light of morning. And the sunlight stole softly and slowly 
down from the pure snowy peaks, and the bluish greys and greens 
of the glaciers. And the virgin robes of spotless snow spread out and 
clothe the Alpine summits with that transcendent light which the finest 
artists decline to imitate on canvas ; for it is a light, the splendour of 
which we could not have imagined from description or from picture, had 
we never seen it with our own eyes. And now at length that purest light 
reaches the rocky fragments that strew the upper moraine ; and the dark 
forests of pine exchange their sombre mantle of night for the richer hues 
of the morning radiance, until the crowded pointed spires and the densely 
serried columns of the thousands of majestic pines stood revealed in 
the glowing light of a glorious September sun. 

How wonderfully the great Creator of the universe has combined and 
interwoven inexplicable beauty with every feature of natural scenery ; 
or, which is the same thing, how admirably has He constructed the 
human mind with that perception of beauty which enables it«to view the 
scenes of nature with deep emotion, and to admire profoundly even 
where it fails in every attempt to analyse and to explain. Mr. Ruskin 
has well pointed out the singular fitness of the pine, in respect of 
physical beauty, for the places it inhabits by preference. Where barren 
mountains and walls of precipice, cut by deep ravines, and strewn with 
mighty fragments and boulders, would present to the eye only disorder 
and desolation ; where all the lines are broken and disjointed, and every 
contour rugged and disfigured, there, nestling in the shady hollows, 
clothing the steep sides with the robes of dignity, crowning the sky- 
line with a symmetrical fringe of beauty, rise the crowded pines, straight, 
formal, angular, each as accurately shaped, and all as exactly alike, as 
their own beautiful cones, each, except under violence or pressure, point- 
ing with its acute topmost shoots with accuracy and precision to the 
zenith. No matter how or why, this harmonious combination of the 
rude and uncomformable with the straight and the formal is certainly 
agreeable to our perception of the beautiful, as often sharp contrasts are 



The Stelvio Pass. 109 

pleasing to the car in music. And the curling vine that creeps so 
tenderly around the walls and shelters the roof of the cottage home, and 
embowers the garden walk, and overarches the village roads in the 
Tyrol, is not more grateful to the eye than these dense dark spaces, 
among which shoot up the straight and crowded columns, bare and 
leafless, roofed in by the deep green verdure, above which rise the massed 
and serrated ridges of the sharply-pointed summits of the pine forest. 

For this reason I conceive the slender church spire to be a far 
more pleasing object amidst mountain scenery than a short low tower, 
while the eye is craving for contrast, and not for imitation. 

No one comes to Trafoi that has a couple of hours to spare without 
visiting the famous " Three Holy Springs," which are reached by a very 
pleasant walk over green meadows, and over the soft yielding turf of 
the forest walks. Here the pines are not, as in the Engadine, dead or 
dying by thousands, standing up gaunt and grey, and hung with long 
dishevelled fringes of rugged grey mosses. For here every tree is fresh, 
strong, and flourishing. On our way we gather with great admiration 
the first sp3cimens we have seen of that noblest of all the beautiful tribe 
of Gentians, the G, asclepiadea, full two feet high, and hung with bells 
of rich deep purple. 

Here, too, as in our descent, we observe the singularly beautiful 
optical phenomenon of a fixed, pale, and delicate faint opal light of the 
subtlest tenderness, apparently as if a sheet of pale blue glass were hung 
suspended over the ice between the glacier and the spectator. This 
beautiful vision seemed to hover at a slight distance from the surface, 
and to hang immovable over particular spots. 

There can be no doubt about the great beauty of the spot chosen by 
the devout Tyrolese for the erection of the pretty little pilgrimage church 
of the " Drei Hcilige Brunnen," though a candid mind, uninformed in 
the deep principles which lead to the formation of " pious beliefs," 
would smile sceptically at the ingenious contrivance which makes it 
appear to the eyes of the simple as if spiritual powers had actually 
fixed here the seat of benevolent wonder-working agencies. At the 
green and wooded base of the Ortlcr range, just over the bank of the 
glacier river, gush out perpetually great torrents of the purest, coldest 



no HouDAY Studies. 

spring water, welling out in sparkling, crystal streams, from mossy banks 
in a score of places. It is a winter resort of bears, from whose frequent 
visits a grassy level above the springs is called the Baren-boden or 
bears' play-ground. Where the gushing waters flow in fullest, a rough 
wooden shed is erected, within which three nearly life-sized figures are 
erected of our Lord, the Virgin Mary, and St John, set in a straight line 
against the wall Secret pipes, unsuspected by the pious Tyrolese, 
are passed up through the bodies of the figures, issuing out from the 
heart of each by an iron spout, and sending forth fresh impetuous 
streams, which pour themselves away into three holes in the wooden 
floor, and pass on into the river. On the 29th September, pilgrimages 
are made to this spot from all the surrounding villages and Sennhiitte, 
and services held in the picturesque church at its side. A small house is 
built close by for the accommodation of pilgrims. 

On our return we visit the miniature church of Trafoi, where scarcely 
thirty worshippers could gather together. Its walls are covered with 
devotional pictures and memorials, the most prominent representing a 
sick man lying upon a bed, at the foot of which stand three gentlemen in 
the habits of the seventeenth century : one in a scarlet coat, with cocked 
hat, another in green, the other in white with a green cap. The legend 
in old German relates how this poor man, having attempted to cross the 
Stilfserjoch in mid-winter, had been nearly frozen to death, but had been 
left crippled with the loss of both his feet In answer to his constant 
callings upon the saints, those three persons looking so much like 
courtiers of the seventeenth century, but who were in reality angels sent 
from heaven in answer to his prayers, came and announced to him his 
complete recovery, which took place forthwith. If unbelievers ask in- 
convenient questions, it is sufficient to reply that it is a " pious opinion," 
which, of course, makes it all true. I have heard it said : " All this 
may seem very absurd ; but the faith is beautiful ! " 

Another large rude picture, supposed to represent the last judgment, 
shows us the Judge sitting upon the throne, the Virgin (without the 
Child) interceding, and the mouth of hell, like a vast dragon's throat 
belching out fire and flames, devouring the wicked. 

We divided the distance of forty miles from Trafoi to Meran into 



The Stelvio Pass, hi 

two stages: by sleeping one night at Eyrs (Schlanders would have been 
far nicer), after walking to it thirteen miles ; then driving to Natums 
in the Stell-wagen, and walking the remaining nine to Meran. Of these 
walks I will say no more than that from Trafoi to Prad, eleven miles, 
was a regular descent of 2,000 feet down a beautiful valley into which 
debouches the fine lateral valley of the Suldenthal. High above the 
road, hanging like an eagle's eyrie upon the rocky mountain side, stands 
the Alpine village of Stilfs, which gives its name to the mighty pass. 
At Prad the descent ceases entirely ; but the Stelvio road proper is con- 
tinued three miles further, until it reaches the bridge over the Adige.* 
• And now we are in the broad and fertile valley of the Vintschgau. 
At this point the valley to the left runs up by Mais and Nauders to the 
lower Engadine ; and to the right the same valley of the Adige — the 
Etschthal — carries us through Eyrs, Schlanders, and Naturns to Meran, 
our abode for the next nine months, in a most rich, and calm, and lovely 
valley, almost reminding one of the Poet Laureate's 

" island valley of Avilion ; 
Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow, 
Nor ever wind blows loudly ; but it lies 
Deep meadowed, happy, fair with orchard lawns, 
And bowery hollows crown 'd with summer sea." 

MoRTE D* Arthur. 
1883. 



Just as I was laying down the last corrected sheets of this little 
work (in all probability my last) I happened to be also arriving at the 
closing pages of the finest of Charles Dickens' inimitable works of 
fiction, his own favourite, " David Copperfield," and I felt moved to 
deep emotion in recognising in his description of a spot not unlike 
Trafoi the faithful expression of that reciprocity which is always found 
between God's great Book of Nature and the pages of the responsive 
heart of a true man. 

" I was in Switzerland. I had come out of Italy, over one of the 



• «< 



Burmio ad Alhcsim," as the marble tablet records. 



112 Holiday Studies, 

fj^reat passes of the Alps, and had wandered with a jjuide among the bye- 
ways of the mountains. If these awful solitudes had spoken to my heart. 
I had not heard their voice, or did not know that I had. I had found 
sublimity and wonder in the dread heights and precipices, in the roaring 
torrents, and the wastes of ice and snow ; but as yet they had taught me 
nothing else. 

" I came one evening before sunset down into a valley, where I was 
to rest. In the course of my descent into it, by the winding track along 
the mountain-side from which I saw it shining far below, I think some 
long-unwonted sense of beauty and tranquillity, some softening influence 
awakened by its peace, moved faintly in my heart I remember pausing 
once with a kind of sorrow that was not all oppressive, not quite despair- 
ing. I remember almost hoping that some better change was possible 
within me. 

" I came into the valley as the evening sun was shining on the remote 
heights of snow that closed it in like eternal clouds. The bases of the 
mountains forming the gorge in which the little village lay were richly 
green, and high above this gentle vegetation grew forests of dark fir, 
cleaving the wintry snow-drift, bridge-like and stemming the avalancha 
Above these were range upon range of craggy steeps, grey rocks, bright 
ice, and smooth verdure-specks of pasture, all gradually blending with 
the crowning snow. Dotted here and there in the mountain's side, each 
tiny dot a home, were lonely wooden cottages, so dwarfed by the tower- 
ing heights that they appeared to be too small for toys. So did even 
the clustered village in the valley, with its wooden bridge across the 
stream, where the stream tumbled over broken rocks and roared away 
among the trees. In the quiet air there was a sound of distant singing 
— shepherd voices ; but as one bright evening cloud floated midway 
along the mountain's side I could almost have believed it came from 
there, and was not earthly music. All at once, in this serenity, the 
great voice of Nature's God spoke to me, and soothed me to lay down 
my weary head upon the grass and weep as I had not wept yet, since 
Dora died I " 

No word of comment of mine shall profane this most touching 
passage. 



INDEX. 



Alpine scenery, 90, 104; by moonlight and 

sunrise, 107, 109. 
Andermatt old church (note), 87. 
Angels* visits, 48. 
Anglo-Saxon period, 15. 
Anne, Countess of Dorset, Pembroke, and 

Montgomery, 25, 31. 
Aske's Pilgrimage, 20. 

B. 

Birden Tower, 19, 31. 
Beauty, Sense of, 105, 108. 
Beggary in Italy, 91. 
Bible abroad, 84. 
Birks Bridge, 54. 
Black Combe, 40. 
Bolton Abbey, 13. 

Woods, 13. 

Parish Church, 15. 

foundation, 16. 

great antiquity, 16. 

Process of building, 17. 

Western Tower, 17. 

Rectory, 17. 

ruined, 21. 

estates, 27. 
Bormio, 85, 90. 
Botany, 60, 83, 99, 107, 109. 
Braulio, River, 97. 
Brook, Beautiful colours in, 59. 
Broughton-in-Furness, 39, 74. 
Browning quoted, 31 . 

C. 

Carr, Rev. W., 14. 
Caterina, Santa, 90. 
Cavendish, House of, 34. 

„ Lord Frederick, 34. 



»» 



»» 



»» 



»• 



»» 



ti 



>? 



>» 



»» 



• » 



)) 



)) 



Cepina, beautiful iron gates, 86. 
Chapels, Roman Catholic, 88, 89, loi. 
Clifford, Blackfaced, 17. 

Family of, 18. 

Shepherd Lord, 18. 

Henry, his wild life, 19. 

household establishment, 24. 
Cockley Beck, 57. 
Cottages in Duddon Valley, 60. 
Countess Pillar, 27. 
Craven, Lords of, their disputes, 20. 
Cretinism, 92. 
Cristallo, Monte, loi. 
Cumberland, George, Earl of, 25. 

D. 

Deer Forests in Cumberland, 20. 

„ Wild, 58. 
Desolation, Valley of, 31. 
Devonshire, Duke of, 27. 
Dickens, Charles (quoted), ill. 
Dolomite Mountain, 98. 
Duddon, River, 53. 

Sonnets, 53. 

Hall, 69. 

Woods, 69. 

Bridge and Sands, 75. 
Dunnerdale Fells, 68. 



>f 



)) 



»» 



«i 



E. 

Education in Switzerland, 83. 

,, Free, 82. 
Elizabeth, Queen, 23. 
Embsay, 16. 
*• Evening Voluntaries," 47. 



F. 



** Faery Chasm," 55. 
Felsite Dike/ 66. 



114 



HouDAY Studies. 



Garibaldians, 97, loi. 
Glacier action, 71. 
Glaciers, 104, 108. 

Goafs Water and its curious rocks, 72. 
Gowdrel Dub, 34, 56. 
Grandson, Battle of, 79. 
,, Castle of, 80. 
Grasmere, 43. 
Grimke*s, Mrs., cards, 82. 

H. 

Hailstorms in Switzerland, 84. 

Hardknot Castle, 57. 

Harter Fell, 54. 

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 46. 

Heber's Ghyll, 32. 

Helvellyn, 60. 

History, ancient and mcxlem compared, 13. 

* Hole-in-the-Wall," 14. 

Hospenthal, 89. 

Human interest in scenery, 49. 



I. 



Invisible beings, 105. 



L. 

Lago di Scale, 97. 

Loggan Beck, 69. 

Lucerne, "glacier garden," 29. 

M. 

Mackereth, Sarah, the ** Westmorland Girl," 

41. 
Madatsch Spitze, 106. 
Meran, iii. 
Meschines, 15. 
Mountain ash. Curious, 31. 

streams, 32. 

scenery, 60. 

roads, 96. 



)) 



ft 



>f 



N. 

Nature beautifying ruins, n. 
Neuch&tel, Lake of, 79. 
Norton, Richard, 22. 
Nortons, Fall of the, 24. 
•*Nutbrown Maid," 20. 



Ortler Spitze, 103. 



O. 



P. 



Parkinson, Canon, 64. 
Paul, Rev. Father, loi. 
Passes, Alpine, 105. 
Pestalozzi, 80. 

Pines in Alpine scenery, 109. 
Pious belief, 109. 
Piz Umbrail, loi. 
Posforth Ghyll, 31. 

R. 

Religion, Change of, at the Reformation, 21. 

Rising in the North, 21. 

Rock scenery, 33, 55. 

Romilly, 15. 

Ruskin quoted, 14, 72. 

„ his religion, 73, 108. 
Rutland, Young, 18. 

S. 

Sarah Mackereth, the *• Westmorland Girl," 

41. 
Seathwaite Church, 62. 

„ Tarn, 61. 

September, best season for Lake District, 57. 
•* Shepherd Lord," 18. 
Skipton Castle, 25. 

„ Lords of, their personal habits, 24. 
Snow on Alps, 90, 104. 
Spondalunga, 100. 
Standard Hill, 24. 
Stelvio Pass, 85, 95. 

,, Passage over, 96. 

„ Road, 95, 97. 

,, Summit, 103. 

,, Tunnels, 97. 
Stepping stones, 65. 
Sirid, The, 15, 28. 
Switzerland, education, 81. 
,, intemperance. Si. 

T. 

Temperance in England and Switzerland, 83. 
Tennyson quoted, 1 1 1 . 



Index. 



US 



Three Holy Springs, 109. 

„ Shire Stones, 59. 
Tourville the murderer, 106. 
Trafoi, 106, 107, no. 
Tresero, Monte, 90. 



Ulpha, 67. 



U. 



V. 



Valley of Desolation, 31. 
Volcanic action, 7 1 . 

W. 
Walker, Rev. Rol>ert, ** The Wonderful," 44, 
63. 



Wallabarrow Crag, 66. 
Waterfalls in Stelvio Pass, 99. 
Waterspout of 1826, 31. 
Weathering of Rocks, 33. 
Westmorland Girl, 39. 
Wharfedale, 14. 

Scenery of, 29. 

trees and flowers, 29, 30, 31 
White Doe of Rylstone, 21. 
Wordsworth, 42. 

„ quoted, passim^ 43. 

Wrynose Gap, 54. 



i% 



t» 



Y. 



Vverdon, 80. 



THE END. 



Printed bv Casshll & Company, Limitru, La Hellk Salvage, London. EC. 



StUetUms from Catsell % Company s PublUatiotu. 



Abbm and ChnrohM 6f Rnglanrt and Walea, Tho: Deiorlptlye, Hlatorloal, 

PlotorlaL azt. 
?dTtntnre, The World ol Fully Illustrated. 9s. 
After London ; or, Wild England. By Richard Jefferies. Cheap Edition. 

3». 6d. 
Along Alaska'! Qreat River. By Lieut. Schwatka. Illustrated. las. 6d. 

American Academy Notes. Illustrated Art Notes upon the National Academy 

of Design, 1889. as. 6d. 

American Tachts and Taditlng. Illustrated. 66. 

Animal Painting In. Water CMkrars. 'Wiih Eighteen Coloured Plates by 

Frkobrick Taylsr. 5s. 
Arabian Nights Entertainments (Cassell's). With about 400 Illustrations. los. 6d. 

Architectural Drawing. By PhbnA Spiers. Illustrated. los. 6d. 

Art» The Magailne o£ Yearly Volume. With several hundred Engravings, and 
Twelve Etchings, Photogravures, ftc. Vol. for 1889, z6s. 

Behind Tlmei By G. P. Lathrop. Illustrated. 2s. 6d. 

Bismarck, Prince. By C. Lowe, M.A. Two Vols. Cheap Edition, los. 6d. 

Blaek Arrow, The. A Tale of the Two Roses. By R. L. Stevenson. 5s. 

Bkitish Ballads. 275 Original Illustrations. Two Vols. Ooth, 7s. 6d. each. 

Bkitlsh Battles on Land and Sea. By James Grant. With about 600 

Illustrations. Three Vols., 4to, £t\ 7s. ; Labraury Edition, i^x los. 
British Battles, Recent. Illustrated. 4to, 9s. Library Edition, lot. 
Bkitlsh Empire, The. By Sir George Campbell. 3s. 
Bkitlsh Mosenm, The Blhle Stndent in th& By the Rev. J. G. Kitchin, M.A. 

Fcap. 8vo, IS. 

Browning, An Introdnctlon to the Study o£ By Arthur Symons. as. 6d. 
Batterflles and Moths, Bnropean. By W. F. Kirby. With 6t Coloured 

PUtes. Demy 4to, 35s. 

Canaries and Cage-Birds, The Dlnstrated Botfk ot By W. A. Blakston, 

W. SwAYSLANO, and A. F. Wikmbs. With 56 Fac-simile Coloured Plates, jss. 
^riit<>iaia and ConYlcts. By Julian Thomas ("The Vagabond"). Cheap 

EdiUoHt 5s. 

Captain Tralklgar. By Westall and Laurie. Illustrated. 5s. 

Cassell's Family Kagailne. Yeariy VoL Illustrated. 9s. 

Cathedral Churches of England and Wales. Descriptive, Historical. Pictorial. 

£diti»m tie luxe, Roxburgh, ^ 
Ceiehrltles of the Gentnry : Being a Dictionary of Men and Women of the 

Nineteenth Centnry. sts. ; roxburght as** 
nifii£ritiy Tear, The. With Illustrations, ys. 6d. 

Chess Prohlem, The. With Illustrations by C. Planck and others. 7s. 6d. 

Children of the Cold, The. By Lieut. Schwatka. as. 6d. 

China Painting. By Florence Lewis. With Sixteen Coloured Plates, and a 
selection of Wood Engravings. With fall Instructions. 5s. 

Choice Dishes at Small Cost By A. G. Payne. Cheap Edition, is. 

Christmas in the Olden Tlmei By Sir Walter Scott. With charming 

Original Illustratioos. 7s. ^. 
Cities of the World. Four Vols. Illustrated, ys. 6d. each. 
CiTil Service, Qnide to Bmidosrment in th& New and Enlarged Edition, 31^ 6d. 
dril Service.— Onlde to Female Bmifloyment in Goremment Offloes. Qoth, is. 
Cllnioal T*fin"*^* for Practitioners and Students of Medldne. (A List of 

Volumes /orwarded pest /re* em applicatiem te tht PttbUehert.) 

Clothing, The Influence of; on Health. By Frederick Treves, F.R.C& ei. 
Oohden Club, Some Works published for the. (^ Compuu List post free on 

mPfliemttom)>^ 



xaMc^— 8.8(^ 



Stkcimu frwm Cmssdl Jt C^mfmmfs PmUicaimmu 

% Bf ProC A. H. Chukch. Sem and EmUrg&i Ediiim^ yL 6d. 
BJglBpiMr, Hm USm aad T«figw iC Df WASHnciow Ii 

Hm T«r Book oC Edited bf Kssntic B. Mussat. 5k 
JvBk. Bf G. Majcvilijc Ytxh. 51L 
OoA Book. Catkoflao OwMfii Vov. 49^ 

Oeokory. A Toor't. Bf Phyixu Bkowkc Cloch gilt or oOed doch. 3s. 6d. 
Oeokory, GuMirs Dletlonazy oC rnnfaiintiig about Nine Tbcosauid Reei|Mft. 

71. 6d. ; r o a b w gh, tcft. 6d. 
Oeok«7, CSMMtTs BIrfTlfng. 40M Thatuand. zs. 

Coostiloo Of tlio Wofld. Tbii Bf RoBEtT Bkowk, M.A.. FIlDl. ftcL Cob- 

pictc io Six VoI«., with about 750 IllpfCnuioai. 4ta^ 71. 6d. cadL 
Ommtloa and Um-Bortml; or. The Cemeteries of tbe Future. Bf W. 

RosimON. With Plates aod IlInttrBtioo*. is. 

flroBiwoll, OliTor: Tho Man and His Wliitai Bf J. Allanson Piciom. U.P. 

ChtAp Ed$tt^m, With Sicel Portrait. 51. 

Onlmaidro Folk. Bir the Antbor of "John OrietMrr ftcL 3s. 6d. 
QfdOlMkUa, Cfaiaeu'a CODdflOi With 12,000 subjects, bcon^t down to the 
latest date. With about 600 Ilhntratioos, 15a. ; roa borgh. x8i. 

Of Olop^dla, Caaaell's lUniatiire. Contaimnff 30.000 SubfectsL Ooch, 5^ 6d. 
Jiftaj TmnaiBg. Bj Prof. J. P. Sheldon, with 25 Fac-simile Coloured Pkto^ 

and muDcroas Wood Engraviiigs. Demy 410, ata. 
Doad Kan's Bo^ A Romance. By Q. 5s. 
Dickons, Cbaracter gkotchos from. First. Secokd. and Tribd SEam. 

With Six OHffinal Drawing* in each, bf .FutDsaiCK Bakmakiv In PutlbGo. ais. eac^ 

Dof, mnstratod Book of tho. By Veko Shaw. aA. With 28 Coloured 

Platca. Cloth bevelled, 3$*. ; half-morooco, 451. 

Dof Btorlso and Dog: Loro. Bf Col. Thos. W. Knox. 6& 

DOf, Tbo.#Bf IDSTONE. Illustrated. 2s. 6d. 

Domostle Dietlonaiy, Tbo. An Encf dopeedia for the Housdiold. Cloth« 7s. 6d. 

Dor4 Oallory, TkO. With 250 Illustrations bf Gustave DorC 4to, 42s. 

Dora's Panto's Infema Illustrated by Gustave Dor<. Popular BdUhn, an. 

Dori's Dante's Pnrgatorlo and FanUUsa Illustrated bf Gustave Doaa. 

Popular Editum . 9 1 s. 

Doi^s Fairy Talos Told Again. With 24 Full-Mge EngraTings bf DoRt. 5a 
Dora's Milton's Paradlso Lost Illustrated bf Gustave DoRt. 410, 2xs. 
Bartk. Our. and its Story. Bf Dr. Robert Brown. F.L.S. With Coloured 

Plates and numerous Wood Engravings. Vols. I. and II. 9s. each. 
Bdintrargk, Old and Bow, Gassell's. With 600 Illustrations. Three Vob., 
OS. each ; librarv binding, £\ los. the set. 

Bgypt: Dsseriptive, Historical, and Pictnrosqno. Bf Prof. G. Ebers. 

Translated hy Clara Bell, with Notes fay Samubl Biech, LL.D., &c. P»/mUmr 
EditipH^ in Two Vols., 43s. 

'W." A Novel. Bv Edgar Henry. Qoth. 3s. 6d. 

Btoetridty, Age ot from Ambor 8onl to Teleplumo. Bf Park Benjamin. 

PhD. 7s.6d. 

Btoetridty, PractleaL By Prof. W. E. Ayrton. Illustrated. 7s. 6d. 
BDCyolop»dlO Dictionary, Tho. A New and Ori^nal Work of Reference to all 

the Words in the English Language. Complete in Fourteen Divisional Vols., loa. 6d. 

each ; or Seven Vols., half>morocco, ats. each ; half-russia, %^, each. 

Bkgineoring, Triumphs ot By Henry Frith. With Eight Full-page Illus- 
trations. 5s. 
Bngland, Gassell's ninstratad History o£ With 2.000 lUustrations. Ten 

Vols.. 4to. 9*. each. Ntw and Rtvtsed Editten. Vols. I., II.. and III., 9s. each. 

Bnglisk History. The Dictionary ol Cheap Edition, xos. 6d. 

Bnglish Literature, Library ot By Prof. Henry Morley. Complete in 5 



fols., 7S. 6d. each. 
Vol. ^ I.— Shortbk English Poems. 
Vol. II.—Illustkations op English 

Religion. 
Vou III.—English Plays. 



Vol. IV.—Shortee Works in English 

Prose. 
Vou V. - Sketches of Longer Works ih 

English Verse and Prose. 



Bnglish Literature, Morley's First Sketch ol Revised Edition, 7s. 6d. 
Bnglish Literature, The Dictionary ot By W. Davenport Adams. Ckoap 

Edition, 7s. 6d. ; roxburgh, los. 6d. 



Selections from CasseU A Company s Publications, 
BngllBh literature, The Story ot By Anna Buckland. New and Cheap 

Sditicn, 3s. 6d. 

Rng11»ft Writers. An attempt towards a History of English Literature. By 
Hbnrt Morlby, LL.D., Professor of English Ltteratnre, University Colkfe, 
London. Vols. L, IL, IIL, IV., and V., 5s. each. 

£eop'i Fablei. With about 150 Illustrations by E. Griset. Cheap BdiHon, 
cloth, 3s. 6d. ; bevelled boards, gilt edges, 5s. 

Btchlng : Its Teobnlcal Processes, with Remarks on GoUectlons and Oolleetlng. 

By S. K. KoBMLXR. Illustrated with 30 Full-page Plates. Price £^ 4s. 

Btlqnette of Oood Society, zs. ; doth, zs. 6d. 

Eye, Ear, r!id Throaty The Manasrement of the. 3s. 6d. 

Fkmlly Phsrsldan, The. By Eminent Physicians and Surgbons. New and 

Revised Edition, Qoth, azs. ; roxburgh, 35s. 

Fenn, CL ManTllle, Works by. Popular Editions, Boards, ss. each ; or doth, 

3S.6d. 

I>utoh the DlTer; or, a Han's Mlstalre. I Poverty Comer. 

Xjr Patienta. The Vioar's People. \ ,_ ru,^ —*- 

The Parson o' Domfbrd. | Sweet Maoe. ^laCiotaeaijr. 

Ferns, European. By Tames Britten, F.L.S. With 30 Fac-simile Coloured 
Plates by D. Blair, F.LS. sxs. 

Field Naturalist's Handbook, The. By Rev. T. G. Wood & Theodore Wood. 5s. 

Flffnler's Popular SdentUio Works. With Several Hundred lUustratioos in 

each. 3«. 6d. each. 
The EnnuMi Baoe. I The Ooean World. 

World Before the Delugep The Vegetable "TTotAiOl 

Beptilee and Birds. I The Inaeot World. 

Mammalia. 

Flfirure Painting In Water Ck>lours. With 16 Coloured Plates by Blanche 
MacArthur and Jbnnib Moors. With full Instructions. 7s. 6d. 

Fine-Art Library, The. Edited by John Sparkes, Prindpal of the Sooth 
Ken^gton Art Schools. Each Book contains about zoo Illustrations. 5s. each. 

Tapeetry. By Eugene Mtats. Translated by 

Miu L. J. DsTis. 
Xzunmviiiff. By Le Vlcomte Henri Deteborde. 

Translated by R. A. M. Sterenson. 
The Bngliah School of Falntlnff. By E. 



Chasueau. Tranilated by L. N. Etneriagton. 
With an Introduction by Trof. Ruskin. 
The Flemish School of Painting. By A. J. 
Wautert. Translated by Mrs. Henry RoaaeL 



The, Dutch 8<»hool of Painting, By Heary 



The Sduoation of the Artist. By Bfaeai 
Chaaneau. Translated by Clara Belt. Naa> 
niuctrated. 

Greek ArohsMlocy. By MasfaM 
Translated by Dr. J. H. Wri^^t. 

Artistic Anatomy. By ProU l>uvaL 
by F. E. Fanton. 
e Dutch Schoo 
Havard. Translated by G. ] 

Flora's Feast : a Masque of Flowers. With Coloured Designs by Waltkr 
Cranb. Kff, 

Flower Palntmirf Elementary. With Eight Coloured Plates. ^ 

Flower Painting In Water Ctolours. With Coloured Plates. First and Second 
Series. 5s. each. 

Flower Painting In Water Ck>lours. First and Second Series. With 90 Fac- 
simile Coloured Plates in each by P. E. Hulmb, F.L.S., F.S.A. With Instnictioos 
by the Artist. Interleaved. 5s. each. 

Flowers, and How to Paint Them. Bv Maud Naftbl. With Coloured Plates, a. 
Forging of the Anchor, The. A Poem. By Sir Samuel Ferguson, LL.D. 

Whh so Original Illustrations. Gilt edges, u. 

Fossil Reptiles, A History of British. By Sir Richard Owen, K.CB., F.R.S., 

&c With a68 Plates. In Four Vols., £19 las. 
France as It Is. By ANDRi Lebon and Paul Pblet. With Three MapSL 
Crown 8to, cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Ftanco-German War, Cassell's History of the. Two Vols. With 500 lUos- 

trations. qs. each. 

Fresh-Water Fishes of Europe, The. By Prof. R G. Sbelbt, F.R.S. Cheap 

Edition, 7s. 6d. 

Qarden Flowers, Familiar. By Shirley Hibbbrd. With Coloured Plates by 

F. K HuLMB, F.L.S. Complete b Five Series. Cloth gilt, las. 6d. each. 

Gardening, Cassell's Popular. Illustrated. Complete in 4 Vols., «. each. 
Geometrical Drawing for Army Candidates. By H. T. Lillbt, M.A. as. 
Geometry, First Elements of BxperlmentaL By Paul Bert. zs. 6d. 
Geometry, Practical Solid. By Major Ross. as. 
Germany, Emperor William ol By Archibald Forbes, vl 6d. 
Gladstone, Life of the Bt Hon. W. & By G. Barnett Smith. With Portxalt 3s.6d. 



StUctions from CasseO A Compan/s PubliceUicns, 



fllatnlngi irom Popular Anthon. Two Vols. With Origixud lUustzmdooi. 

49 4to, 9*. each. Two VoU. in One, 15s. 

Ctreat Northern Railway. The Official nimtrated Qulde to the. is. ; doth, at. 
Ctreat Palnten of Ghristendom, The, from Clmabne to WUkie. By John 

FoKBSS-RouxTSON. lUuscratcd throtigboau Po^iar Editwm, doch gik, las. 6d. 

Ctre&t Wettem Railway, The Official Dlustrated Oviide to the. New and 

Rnnud Edition, is. ; doch, a«. 

CkOliver'g Trarela With 88 Engravings by Mokten. Cheap Editum. Qoth, 
3t. 6d. ; doth gilt, 5s. 

Onm Boughi and Wattle Bloom. By Donald Macdonald. 5s. 

Onn and its Deyelopmentk The. By W. W. Greener. Illustrated, zot. 6d. 

Chme, Modem Shot By W. W. Grefner. Illustrated. 5s. 

CKinmaker of Moicow, Th& A Novel By Sylvan us Cobb, Junr. Qoth, 3s. 6d. 

Health at SchooL ^ Clement Dukes. M.D., RS. 7s. 6d. [burgh, 35s. 

FtfiHh, The Botfk OL By Faunent Physidans and Surgeons. Qoth, azs. ; rox- 

Health, The Inflnenoe of (nothing on. By F. Treves, F. R.CS. as. 

Heaveni, The Story of the. By Sir Robert Stawell Ball, LL.D., F.R.S., 

Ro^ Astron<Mner of Ireland. Cdoured Plates and Wood Engravings, ^xs. 6d. 

Heroei of Britain in Peaoe and War. In Two Vols., with 300 Original Illus- 
trations. 5s. eadx ; or One VoL, library binding, los. 6d. 

H61y Land and the Bible, The. By the Rev. Cunningham Grikix, D.D. 

With Map. Two Vols. a4S. 

Homee, Our, and How to Hake them Healthy. By Eminent Authorities. 

Illustrated. 15s. ; roxburgh, xBs. 

Horse, The Book of th& By Samuel Sidney. With a8 Fac-simile Coloured 

Plates. Demy 4to, 35s. ; half-morocoo, ;6s 5s. 
Hooiehold, Gaesell'e Book of the. Illustrated. VoL I. 5s. 
Household Onlde, OasseU'a With Illustrations and Coloured Plates. New and 

Reviud Edition^ complete in Four Vols., 90s. 

How Dante Climbed the Mountain. By Rose Emily Selpb. With Eight 

Full-page Engravings by Gustavb Doai. as. 
How Women may Earn a Living. By Mercy Grogan. Cheap EdUion. 6d. 

India, Cassell's History ol By James Grant. With 400 Illustrations. 15a 
In-door Amnsements, Card Qames, and Fireside Fan, Oassell'a 3s. 6d. 
bdnstrial Remuneration Conference. The Report oC as. 6d. 
Insect Variety : its Propagation and Distribution. By A. H. Swxnton. 7s. 6d. 
Irish Parliament, A Uinlatnre History of the. Bv J. C. Haslam. 3d. 
Irish Parliament, The : What it Was, and What it Did. By J. G. Swift 

McNeill, M.A., M.P. is. 
Irish Question, The Speaker's Hand-book on the. B^ an Irish Liberal, za 
Irish Union, The : Before and After. By A. K. Connell, M.A. as. 6d. 
John Parmelee's Cnrse. By Julian Hawthorne, as. 6d. 
Karmel the Scont A Novel. By Sylvanus Cobb, Junr. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 
Kennel Qolde, PraoticaL By Dr. Gordon Stables. Illustrated. Cheap Edition, za 
Khivai A Bide ta By Col Fred Burnaby. is. 6d. 
Kidnapped. By R. L. Stevenson. Illustrated Edition. 5s. 
King Solomon's BQnes. By H. Rider Haggard. Illustrated Edition, 5a 
Ladies' PhjTSician, The. By a London Physician. 6s. 
Lady Biddy Fane, The Admirable. By Frank Barrett. Popular Edition, 

crown 8vo. 5». ; Three VoU , Cloth, 31s. 6d. 

Landscape Painting in Oils, A Coarse of Lessons in. By A. F. Grace. 

'^th Nine Reproductions in Colour. Cheap Edittom, ass. 
Law, How to Avoid. By A. J. W1LI.1 ams, M. P. Cheap Edition, is. 
Laws Of Every Day Life, The. By H. O. Arnold-Forster. is. 6d. Preten-- 

tmtiom Edition. 3s. 60. ^ ^ 

Legends for lioneL By Walter Crane. Coloured Illustrations. 5s. 
Letts's Diaries and other TimenuiTing Publications are now published ezdu- 

sively by Ca.ssbll & Companv. {A List ttnt Post /rtg on applicaiion.) 

Life of Henry Richard, M.P. By Charles Mialu with Portrait. 7a 6d 



SeUcHom firom Cassell d: Company s Publications, 
Local Oovemment in England and Germany. By the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert 

MORIBR, G.C.B., &c. xs. 

London and Nortli Woatem Railway, Tlio Offldal ninatrated Onlde to the. 

It. ; cloth, as. 

London and South Woatem Railway, The Offldal ninatrated Qnlde to the. 

IS. ; cloth, 9S. 

London, Brighton and South Coast Railway, The Offldal ninatrated Qnlde 

to the, IS. ; cloth. 9S. 
London (Ancient and Modern). From the Sanitary and Medical Point of View. 

By G. V. PooRB. M.D., F.R.CP. Illustrated. 5s. 
London, Greater. By kdward Walford. Two Vols. With about 400 

Illustrations. 9s. each. Libnuy Edition. Two Vols. £x the set. 

London. Old and Kew. By Walter Thornbury and Edward Walford. 

Six Vols., each containing about aoo lUustntions and Maps. Ooth, gs. each. Librmrr 
Edition. Imitation roxburgh, £%, 
LoDcrfeilow, H. W., Choioe Poems by. Illustrated by his Son, Ernest W 

LONCFBLLOW. 6s. 

Lonc^feilow'a Poetical Worka. Fine-Art Edition, Illustrated throughout with 
Original Engravings. Royal 4to, cloth gilt, £^ 3s. Popuiar Edition. i6s. 

Master of BaUantrae, The. By Robert Louis Stevenson. 5s. 

Mechanics, The Practical Dictionary ot Containing xsooo Drawings. Four 
Vols. SIS. each* 

Medical Handbook of Life Assnranoe. By James Edward Pollock, M.D.. 

F.R.C P., and Jambs Chisholm, Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries, London. 7s. 6d. 
Medldne, Matiwia for Stndents ol (A Ust forwarded post fru on application,) 

Metropolitan Tear-Book, The. Paper, as. ; doth, as. 6d. 

Midland Railway, The Offldal Dlnstrated Qnlde to the. is. ; cloth, as. 

Milton's L'Allegro and n Penseroso. Fully IDustrated. Qoth, as. 6d. 

Modem Europe, A History o£ By C. A. Fyffb, M.A. 3 Vols.. las. each. 

Mnslc. Dlnstrated History of. By Emil Naumann. Edited by the Rev. 

sir F. A. GoRB Ousblby, Bart Illustrated. Two Vols. 31s. 6d. i' 

National Library, Cassell's. In Weekly Volumes, each containing about 193 

pages. Paper covers, 3d. ; cloth, 6d. {A List of the Veln$ius tdrtady pMbUtked will 

oe sent pest free en application^ 

natural History, Cassell's Concise. By E. Perceval Wright, M.A.. NLD., 

F.L.S. WiUi several Hundred UlustiaticMia. 7s. 6d. : roxburgh, los. 6d. 

natural History, Cassell's Kew. Edited by ProC P. Martin Duncan, M.E. 
F.R.S., F.G.S. With Contributions by Eminent Scientific Writers. Complete ia 
Six Vols. With about s,ooo hiah-dass lUustratimis. Extra crown 410, cloth, qs. each. 

nature, Short Studies from, illustrated. Cheap Edition, as. 6d. 

Kurslnff for the Home and for the Hospital, A Handbook ot By Cathb- 

RiNB J. Wood. Cheap Edition, zs. 6d. ; doth. ss. 

Hurslnff of Sick Children, A Handbook for the. By Catherine J.Wood, as. 6d. 

Orion the Gold Beater. A Novel By Sylvanus Cobb, Junr. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 
Our Own Country. Sbc Vols. With z,aoo Illustrations. Cloth, 7s. 6d. each. 

Pazton's Flower Oarden. Three Vols. With xoo Coloured Plates. ,£ i is. each. 

People I've Smiled With. Recollections of a Merry Little Life. By Marshall 

P. WlLDBR. 9S. 

Peoples of the World, The. By Dr. Robert Brown. Complete in Six Volumes. 
With Illustrations. 7s. 6d. each. 

Phantom City, The. By W. Westall. 5s. 

Photography for Amateurs. ByT. C. Hepworth. Illustrated, xs. ; ordoth. is. 6d. 

Phrase and Fable, Dictionary o£ By the Rev. Dr. Brewer. Cheap Edition^ 

Enlarged t doth, 3s. 6d. ; or with leather back, 4s. 6d. 

Picturesque America. Complete in Four Vols., with 48 Exquisite Sted Plates, 
and about 800 Original Wood Engravings. ;£• as. each. 

Picturesque Canada. W^th about 600 Original Illustrations. Two Vols., 
£33$. each. 

Picturesque Europe. Complete in Five Vols. Each containing 13 Exquisite Sted 
Plates, from Original Drawinn, and nearly 900 Original Illustrations. £%\ ; half- 
morocco, £^1 ics. ; morocco gut, £1% los. The Popular Edition is now compUu 
in Five Vols., xBs. each. 



Stltctiau from Catull i Cempax/i ruiluaiioms. 

riCMD Kmimt, Tha FracUcaa By Liwts Wright. lUuimted. 31 6d. 
Uncns, Tha Book ol By Rohkrt Fulton. Edited by L.swis WctcHT. With 

•D Colniml PtaiH »i>d nuiiKrout Wood EninoincL jii. «d. ; h^r.Denaa, ^i b. 
VMkA Onlde to Snrapa (&m«U'i). Slie 5I i°- x 3t '"¦ Leaihn. 6*. 
Fewnm, BapreMntattTB pf Urlag Po*U, i m a rlB Mi utd BdsUiIl Sdected by 

tha P(HU ibamKlTEi. iji. 

re*tat OuMll'i Wnlktim Ubnir of Uio ^- 

KUHr a. Tw o Vtli. OgOk. ¦•> auk : •• dolh 



renltry Kaapar. TlW FrmcUcaL By Lkwis Wiight. Whh Coloured Flaui 

ud Illiutiadani, u. 6d. 
hnltir, TIM Book OC By Liwu Wbicht. Pttular Editiom. V/lOi lUiulm- 

IHHU op WdikI, tol 6d. 

FonlUr, The ninittAtod Book ot Br Liwii Wiight. With FiTijr Exquisu 

Coloand Pkt», aod nuniciTiuiWood tnm^an. Ooih. jil U. 1 luir-moncco, jCih. 

rilBttiiK llMhliLBrT lad LottatproH Filiitliic, Hodom. Bv Fbec. I. F. 

WIUOH ud DoucLkS C»V. llliulrmltll. ¦!•. 

QoMa viotoiiK, Tba Ufa and Tlmo* of. By Robeit Wilson. Complete in 

qooor Bmo, JL By W, Wm'AU.. ClMh, 51'. 

lAbUt-KMpor, TI18 PncUotL By Cuniculus. Iliuitisted. 3*. 6d. 

laUwsf tSamj, OkuoU'I. Crown 8vo, boards, 11. each. 




Selections from Cassell # Company s Pubiuaiions. 



RlTen of Great Britain. The: Descriptive, Historical. Pictorial. RIVERS 
of THE EAST COAST. With numerous hixhlyfinished Engravings. Royal 4to, 
with Etching as Frontispiece, 42s. 

BoMetti. Dante Oabrlel, as Deilgner and Writer. , Notes by William 

MiCHAML RO8SBTTI. TS. 6d. 

Royal River, The: The Thames, finm Sonroo to Soil >^th Descriptive Text 

and a Series of beautiful Engravings. £9 as. 

Rnssia. By Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace, M.A. 5s. 
Russia, Trath about By W. T. Stead. Demy 8vo. cloth, los. 6d. 
Russo-Turldsh War, Oassell's History ot With about 500 Illustrations. Two 
Vols., <)s. each ; hbrary binding. One Vol.. xss. 

81 Cuthbert's Tower. By Florence Warden. Three Vols., cloth, 31s. 6d. 
Saturday Journal, Oassell'a Yearly Vols.. 7s. 6d. 

Beience for AIL Edited by Dr. Robert Brown, M.A., F.L.S., &c. Reviua 
Edition, With 1,500 Illustrations. Five Vols.. 9s. each. 

Sea, The: Its Stirring Story of Adventure, Peril, and Heroism. By 

F. Whympbr. With 400 Illustrations. Four Vols.. 7s. 6d. each. 
Secret of the Lamas, The. A Tale of Thibet. Crown 8vo, ^. 
Sent Baok by the Angels ; and other Ballads of Home and Homely Life. By 

Fkbdskick Langbridgb, M.A. Popular Edition, xs. 

Shaftesbury, The Seventh Earl of; &.Q., The Life and Work o£ By Edwin 

HooDBJt. With Portraits. Three Vols., 36s. Popular EdiiioH^ in One Vol., 7s. 6d. 

Shakspere, The IntemationaL Edition dt luxe, 

** King Henry IV." Illustrated by Herr Eduard GxOtznbk. £s xoa. 

" As You Like It." Illustrated by Mons. Emilb Bayard. £2 ><>•• 

"Romeo and Juliet.'' Illustrated by Frank Dicksbb, A.R.A. £$ 5** 
Shakspere, The Leopold. With 400 Illustrations, and an Introduction by F. J. 

Furnivalu Ckoap Edition^ 3s. 6d. Small 4to, cloth gilt, gilt edges. 6s. ; roxburgh, 7s. 6a. 
Shakspere, The RojraL With Exquisite Steel Plates and Wood Engravings. 

Three Vols. 15s. each. 

Shakespeare, Oassell's Quarto Edition. Edited by Charles and Mary Cowdbn 

Clarkb^ and containing about 600 Illustrations by H. C Sblous. Complete in 
Three Vols. , cloth gilt, £2 3s. — ^Also published in 'Three separate Volumes, in doch, 
vis. :— The Combdiks. azs. ; The Historical Plays, xBs. 6a. : The Tracboibs, 95s. 

Shakespeare^ Miniature. Illustrated. In Twelve Vols., in box. zas. ; or in 
Red Paste Grain (box to match/, with spring catch, lettered in gold, ais. 

Shakespeare, The Eni^and ot By E. Goadby. Illustrated. New Edition, as. 6d. 

Shakespearean Scenes and Charaotera By Austin Brereton. Royal 4to, aza 

Sketching £rom Nature in Water Colours. By Aaron Penlby. 15s. 

Skin and Hair, The Management of the. By Malcolm Morris, F. R. C.S. as. 

Social Welfiftre, Subjects of. By the Rt Hon. Sir Lyon Playfair, M.P. 7s. 6d. 

South Eastern Railway, The Offldal Illustrated Guide to The. zs. ; cloth, as. 

Spectacles. How to Select, in Cases of Long. Short, and Weak Sight. By 
Charlbs Bbll Taylor, F.R.CS. and M.D., Edin. is. 

Splendid Spur. The. Being Memories of the Adventures of Mr. John Marvel, 



a Servant of His late Majesty, King Charles I., in the yean 1643-3. Written by 
himself. Edited in Modem English 1>y **Q.'' Author of ^* Dead Man's Rock," ft& 
Crown 8vo, 5s. 

Sports and Paatimes, Oassell's Complete Book of! Cheap Edition, W^th 

more than 900 Illustrations. Qoth. 3s. 6d. 
Starland. Being Talks with Young People about the Wonders of the Heavens. 
By Sir Robbkt StawbllBall, LL.D., F.R.S.. F.R.A.S. Illustrated. Crown Svot 6s. 

Stock Exchange Tear-Book, Tha By Thomas Skinner, xas. 6d. 
Sunlight and Shada With numerous Exquisite Engravings. 7s. 6d. 

Thackeray, Character Sketches from. Sue New and Original Drawings by 

Frbdbrick Barnard, reproduced in Photogravure, sis. 
Three and Sixpenny Libraxy of Standard Tales, ftc. All Illustrated and bound 

in cloth gilt. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. each. 
Jane Austen and her Works. 
Mission IiifiB in Ghreeoe and Palestine. 
The Komanoe of Trade. 
The Three Homes. 
Deepdale Vioarace. 
In l>aty Bound. 

Fairy Tales. By PioC Moriejr. 

TM Book for all Publlo Examinatlona By W. S. Thomson. M.A. zs. 



The Half Sisters. 

PeffQ OgUrie's Inheritaaoa. 

The ramily Honour. 

Xether West. 

Working to Wizi. 

KrUofimd his Fables. 



Selections from Cassell A Company s Publicaiums, 



TtMsnre bland. By R. L. Stevenson. Illustrated. 5s. 
TtMLtmont. The Taar-Book ot A Critical Review for Practitioners of Medidne 
and Surgery. 5s. 

TkM Painting In Water Ck>loiin. By W. H. J. Boot. With Eighteen 

Coloured PUtes. and valuable instructiont by the ArtisL 5s. 
Tteei, Familiar. Bv G. S. Boulger, F.L.S., F.G.S. Two Series. With Forty 

fttU-page Coloured Plates by W. H. J. Boot. im. 6d. each. 
MiunpliB Of Engineering. With Eight full-page Illustrations. 5s. 
Troy Town, The AetonlBhlng Hlatory ot By Q, Author of " Dead Man's Rock.** 

Crown 8vo, doth, 5s. 

Under a Strange Kask. By Frank Barrett. Illustrated. Two Vols. xaa. 
"Uhloode": The UnlTeml TUegzaphlo Phrase Book. Pocket and Desk 

Editions, as. 6d. eadi. 

united states, Oassell's History of the. By the late Edicund Oluer. With 600 

Illustrations. Three Vols. 9s. each. 

United States. The Youth's mstory ot By Edward S. Elus. Illustrated. 

Four Vols. 368. 

Universal History, Cassell's niostrated. With nearly One Thousand 
Illustrations. Vol. I. Early and Greek History.— Vol. II. The Roman Period. — 
Vol. III. The Middle Ages.— Vol IV. Modem Hutory. os. each. 

Vaodnatlon Vindicated. An Answer to the leading AnU- Vaccinators. By JORii 
C. McVail, M.D., D.P.H. Camb. 5s. 

VeUed Beyond, The. A Novel Bv S. B. Alexander. Ooth, 3s. 6d. 

Ylear of Wakefield and other works by Oliver Goldsmith. Illustrated. 

3s. 6d. ; cloth, gilt edges, 5s. 
Water-colour Painting, A Conrse ol With Twenty-four Coloured Plates by 
R. P. LsiTCH, and full Instructions to the PuptL 5s. 

What Olrls Can Da By Phyllis Browne. 2s. 6d. 

Wild Birds, Familiar. By W. Swaysland. Four Series. With 40 Coloured 

Plates in each. xss. 6d. each. 
Wild Rowers, Familiar. By F. E. Hulme, F.L.S., F.&A. Five Series. With 

40 Coloured Plates in each. las. 6d. each. 

Wise woman. The. By George Macdonald. as. 6d. 

Woman's World, The. Yearly Volume. i8s. 

Wordsworth's Ode on Immortality, and lines on TIntem Abbey. Fully 

Illustrated. Cloth, as. 6d. 
World of Wit and Hnmonr, The. With 400 Illustrations. Qoth, 7s. 6d. ; doth 

gilt, gilt edges, xos. 6d. 
World of Wonders, The. With 400 Illustrations. Two Vols. 7s. 6d. each. 
World's Lumber Boom, The. By Selina Gaye. Illustrated, as. 6d. 
Tnle Tide. Cassell's Christmas Annual, is. 

ILLUSTRATED MAGAZINES. 
The Quiver^ for Sunttay and General Reading, Monthly, 6d. 

CiisaelVa Family Meigazine. Monthly, yd. 
*^ Little Folks '' Magazine, Monthly, 6d. 
The Magazine of Art, Monthly, is. 
The Woman^s Worlds Monthly, is. 
CasaelVe Saturday Journal, Weekly, id. ; Monthly, 6d. 
Work. An Illustrated Magazine of Practice and Theory for all Wofk- 
men, Professional and Amateur. Weekly, id. ; Monthly, 6d 

• • Fidi partieuUrt qf CASSELL & COMPANY'S Monthly Serial PabUcattOBS 

wiUU/imndin Cassbll & Company's COMPLfil'ECATALOGUE. 



Catalogues of Cassell & Company's Publications, which may be had at an 

Booksellen', or will be sent post free on application to the Publishers :— 
Cassell's Complbtb Catalogue, containing particulars of One Thonaaiui 

Volumes. 
Casskll's Classified Catalogue, in which their Works are arranged aocoidtnff 

to price, from Tkrtepenet to Fi/ly Guineas. 
Cassell's Educational Catalogue, containing particulars of ' Cassbll ft 

Company's Educational Works and Students' Manuals. 

CASSELL & COMPANY, Limited. LudgaU HiU, LctuUn. 



SeleetioHS from Cassett it Company s PmbUcaHons, 



"Heart ChardB." A Series of Works by Eminent Divines. Bound in cloth, red 
; edges, II. each. 



ICj Tattler. Brth«RlgfatR«T.A«htaiiOxaBclai, 
* - • of I- ^^* 

BUiop of Rlpon. 



late Blihop Of IfontreaL 
Bible. Bt tbo Rt. K«t. W. Bojrd Carpootar, 



ICj Work for Ood. By tho Rigbt R«r. Biriiop 

GittarllL 
ICj Olijeet in Ufo. By tte V«a. ArchdMCMi 

Ffemr, D.D. 
Xjr AepiretioBa. B/tbcReT.G.MathMoo.D.D. 
Kr Bmotional Ufo. By tho Ror. Prcb. Chad* 

wick. D.D. 
ICjBody. BytheR«v.Prof.W.G.BlaUde.D.D. 



]|7 BooL Bif dM R«v. P. B. F»w«r, M.A. 

](& Growth in Divine Ufo. By the Rev. 

Prebendary Reynolds, M.A. 
Xj Emreefter. By the Very Rev. Dean Bicker^ 

neth . 
ICj Walk witti Ood. By the Very Rev. Dean 

MontgoaMfy. 
ICj Aide to the Divine Idfo. By the Very 

Rev. Dcaa Boyle. 
Xy Booreee of Btrenfth. By the Rev. E. B. 

Ienkins, M.A.. Secretary of the Weileyaa 
llMkwary Sodety. 



HOlj Land and the Blhle, Tlie. A Book of Scripture Illustrations gathered in 
Palestine. By the Rev. Cunningham Gbikib, D.D. Two Vols., demy 8yo, i.iao 
pages, with Map. Price 94s. 

"X IfUBt" Short Missionary Bible Readmgs. By Sophia M. Nugent. 
Enamelled cover, 6d. ; cloth, gilt edges, is. 

life Of OlirlBt, The. By the Ven. Archdeacon Farkar, D.D., F.R.S., Chaplain 
in Ordinary to the Queen. 

Illustratbo Edition, with about 300 Original Illustrations. Extra crown 4t(V 
. doth, gilt edges, sis. : morocco antique, 4as. 

Library Edition. Two Vols. Qoth, S4S. ; morocco, 4aa. 

Popular Edition, in One VoL 8vo, cloth, 6s.; cloth, gilt edges, 7s. 6d. ; Peftiaa 
morocco, gilt edges, los. 6d. ; tree>calf, 15s. 

Carrlaire Ring, The. By William Landkls, D.D. Bound in white 

leatherette, gilt edges, in box, 6s. ; French morocco, 8s. 6d. 

Hoees and Qeology; or, the Harmony of the Bible with Bolenoe. By 

the Rev. Samuel KiNNS, Ph.D., F.R.A.S. Illustrated. Chta^ EdiH^m, 6s. 

Protestantism, The History ofl By the Rev. J. A. Wylib. LL.D. Containing 
upwards of 600 Original Illustrations. Three Vols., 37s. ; Library Edition, 3oe. 

^Qolver" Yearly Volnme, The. With about 600 Original Illustrations and 
Coloured Frontbpiece. 7s. 6d. Also Monthly, 6d. 

tl George for England; and other Sermons preached to Children. Fifth 
Edition, By the Rev. T. Tbignmouth Shore, M.A. 5s. 

tl Paul, The Life and Work ol By the Ven. Archdeacon Farrar, D.D., 

F.R.S., Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen. 

Library Edition. Two Vols., cloth, a4S. ; calf, 49s. 

Illustrated Edition, complete in One Volume, with about 300 lUnstratiooi, 
£1 IS. ; morocco, £9 as. 

Popular Edition. One Volume, 8vo, cloth, 6s. ; cloth, gih edges, 7s. 6d. ; 
Persian morocco, los. 6d. ; tree-calf, X5S. 

flefmlnr Life, The Gospel of the. Sermons preached at Oxford. By the Hon. 
W. H. Fremantlb, Canon of Canterbury. CAm/ Edition, as. 6d. 

¦If 11 We Know One Another ? By the Rt. Rev. J. C. Ryls, D.D., Bishop of 

Liverpool. Ntw and Enlarged Edition. Qoth limp, is. 

Stromata. By the Ven. Archdeacon Sheringham, M.A« ss. 6d. 

•« Sunday," Its Orlglxi, History, and Present Obligation. By the Ven. Arch- 
deacon Hbssby, D.C.L. Fi/tk Edition, 7s. 6d. 

Twilight of Life, The: Words of Counsel and Comfort lor the Agod. By 

John Ellbrton, M.A. is. 6d. 
Toioe of Time. The. By John Stroud. Qoth gilt, is. 







Br\^UuAa 



Br ProC W. E. Atktxkc 7s. 6d. 
Atal^oQkor~ 

A Fbsl Skvtch o^ firomtbe Eaiiiest Period to ibe 
Bt PraC HnoT Moklbt. 7&. 6d. 

EdiSBd I7 ProC WALUkcx. MJL n. 

C In paper, 6d. ; cioth, 91L 
Xem ^md Ji€tmatd B^iti^m. Puts L ud IL. 
6d. : iiM|iliii. 4S. 6d. Key, t&. 6d. 

bluish aad£Bslltb-Ft«nciiIMell0W7. Emiinfy Iktm smd EmUr^ 
Editigm. 1.190 mces, Bvo. dodk, yk. 6d. 

Pnldle SdiooL Br GunxAUMK S. Cokkaix as. 6d. 
riimilt By the Rer. PtoC Galbkaitb, 



L.IL.IU. m. 



tbe RcT. Prat HAuarrox. M.O^ IXCL. 



L.dMh.«. 



r. Ftrrt Kliimenti of Bxperimgntal. Bjr Paul Bekt. F^y lUustrated. 

IS. 6d. 

J, Pnetteal Solid. By Major Ross, R.E. ss. 
IMettonazy, CaneII*i Hew. German-Eogiish, Engiish-German. CSodi, 
7& 6d. ; hilf Moiocco, ofk ^^^^ 

Of To-Daj. By Dr. Heinemank. is. 6d. 
Boftdliiir. Fbsl Lmmbs IXL ByA.TAGST. lUustrated. is. 
Hand and Csra Ttalnlni^. By G. Ricks. B.S& Two Vols., with x6 CokHired 

PlAtes in each VoL Crown 410. 6s. each. 

Handbook of Hov Cods of Bagnlatlona, By John F. Moss. New amd Jfevistd 

. Edititm. u. ; doth, as. 

Klatorlcal Gartoona, Caaaell'a OOlonrad. Sue 45 in. x 33 in. as. each. Mounted 

oa canvas and vaniisbed, with rollers. 5s. each. (DescriptiTe pamphlcf, z6 pp^, zd.) 

Historical Course for Bcnooli, Caasell't. mustrated throughout! I.— Stories 

from Englidi History, is. II. — ^The Simple Outline of Engu^ History, is. 3d. 
IIL— TheOam History of England, as. 6d. 
Lsttn-BBgUali Bletlonary, OasseU's. Thoroughly revised and conccted, and ia 
pan r»>writt«n by J. R. V. Maxchant, M.A. 3s. 6d. 



Srltiliem fram CaiuB * Comfany't Puhhraiism. 

r.Mn.Bm-H.h .n^ BnyH.h.TjM.. n^nMiMifiTy I^ J. R. BeAKD, D.D.. Uld C. 

Bm.d, RA. Crown 8», 914 PH. y. 6d. 
bitin Prlnur, Th* Naw. By Prof. J. V. Postoate. 31. 6d. 
lAWl of BT«r7-Da7 UA. For Ibe Useof Schooti. B^ H. O. AKN0LI>-FDKSTU. 

lAj Tasti for Um Tmuig', In B^gH'*' and FnnclL fiv Mr*. Richau) 

STi.*irH«v. ».id. 
UtUa Polka' HIlUlT of Esclud. By ISA Craig-Knox. lUustnled. 11. Gd. 
¦¦Mny of tba Homa. Tho : A Book of Eknucsde Economy for School uid Homa 

Vtt. ByHn.SAHinLA.BAUi>rT. il M. 

HaoboJiltii aQd *^* ****'"¦ Daslsii, NwnaHaAl Bxuiplaa In PnoUooL By 

R. C. Blainb, M.E. Wilh Diicnni. Uolh, a. fid. 
"Ilodel Joint" Wall Bhaota, for Iniuuctioii in Muitul TniniDi;. ^ S. 

Bahth. Eigbi ShKti, h. Cd. uch. 
Hula, An Eloniantary Hanunl ot By Hsnky Leslie, ii. 
popnlarEdaoalOr, CumU'* Hev. With Reviwd Text, New MajB, New Colonnd 

Plata, New Trpc, ftc To be <:i>inplet«l id Eight Vali., ja. ach. 
Popnlar Edneator, OaaaaU'l. Complete in Six Vols.. 51. each. 
~ "" By H. O. ASNOLD-FOBSTFB. 



By Rer. J. Dennis Hied. Crown S<ni. i 



Raaden CmhU'I "Higber OUat" ;— "The World's Lumbei Room," IDn*- 
nwd, B. 6d.:" Short Smdia bam Nanin," lUuimed. n 6i,: "TfaB WoiU 
' Renina." (Ttn in Seiiu. ) Ckiih. «. ocb. \LUI m nfflU^itn.-i 
._!, CMtalTa BUtoilo»L Illustrated throughout, prioied on superior papM-, 

¦Ddfltmnfly bound in dalh, (Litt en afptktUitn.) 

BaadoTi, Caaaall'i BaafliiMa Carefully graduaied, extremely iatoiating, and 

lllnuniln] ihrgnlboul. {LM ett mf^Umlim) 
KMdan for Intut Bohooli, Colonrad. Thna Book*. Each cootaining 4* 

4 pai«, induding 8 pM« in coIodis. «d. Hch. 
Btaden,TlieIIOilnnaMKnpblo«L lUusmtedlhrciuchouI. [LiitenaffUtaHtm.) 
Baftdan, T&allOdaniSchOOL Illustrated. [Liil m afflicatitH.) 
yT*'**"r and SpalUstf Book, OaaaeH'i Illnatr«t«d. 11. 
¦chOOl Baak """"''i A By Aches Lu(ubekt. 6d. 
Renlptnra, A Prlmar o£ Br E. Roscos Muluns. Illustmed. 3*. 6d. 
Uulnpara Baadlng Book, Thei By H.Courthopk Bowkh, M.A. ItlustiKlad. 

It. 6d. AUo iuued in Thm Boolu. ii. ach. 
tbakilMra'a Plar* for Scliool Vf. lUuiirated. 5 Books. 6d. eadi. 
Bpalllni;. A ComplBte Haniul oC ^ J. D. Mouu^ LL.D. 11. 
Toclmlcal Ednoator, Cuiall'i. Illustrated thioiubouL Four Voh., p. ndL 
Teehnloal Mannali, C^wull'a. lUostraled tbroughont :— 
Brlcliluioi.. iicj..%.ud ^ur. !>. Modal Snwli 



^upanten A Jolnvn. Xlntwldte ib 
Unau DrawlOff nnd Frojoaldoi 



Mod*l Drawlnx. ^ 
OrOapikplilau and Imtrmti 
' ^-alP«™rtl«. _. 



AD^ltd^ KHbanlDa. b"'^ X. t. 14 

I -"f- ¦¦¦"- - - 

liy Prof. 



ih and Olook X a hin f. B* D. Clunw, 



flptniUiW Woi^lini and Wonted. By W. 
Oa£ia Tools Worked iij KanCt aM Xa. 



BUal and ''^_ "ff™- "¦ "- Cremwiod, 

Taat Oarda, OauoU'a OomUnaUnL 
IiMt Cards, OaaaoU'i MoOara BobooL In acts, is, each. 
A Ctfir Pf Cattell anU Company's Complete Cataloau» will 
it/amardtd fast /ru en apflicaticH. 



Selictions from Ccusell «£r Company s Publications, 



S0oks for i|0nng ^tti]/\t. 




Bo-Peep. A Book for the Little Ones. With Original Stories and Verses. 

lllostrated with beautiful Pictuna on nearly every page. Yearly Volume. Elegant 

picture boards, as. 6d. ; cloth gilt, gilt edges, 3s. 6a. 
OmmII'i Pictorial Scrap Book, containing nearly two thousand Pictures beautifully 

{>rinted and handsomely bound in one large volume. Coloured boards, 15s. ; doth 
ettered, ais. 

LogendB for Lionel New Picture Book by Walter Crane. 5s. 

Flora'! Feaat A Masque of Flowers. Penned and Pictured by Walter 

Crank. With 40 pnges in Colours. 5s. 
Tho New CMldren's Alliuxn. Fcap. 4to, qao pages. Illustrated throughout. 3s. 6d. 
Tlie Tales of the Sixty ifandartna By P. v. Ramaswami Raju. 5s. 
Cttft Books for Tounir People. By Popular Authors. With Four Original 

Illustrations in each. Cloth gilt, is. 6d. each. 

By 



TiM B07 Huntora of Xantookj. 

Edwards. EUs. 
Bad Faatharx a Tale of the Amavloaa 

Trontlar. By Edward S. ElUa. 
Vklttarst or. ** It's a Iioag Laao tliat has 

no liinung.'* 
TMsrt or, **Tnoa« who ZiTO in Olaaa 

Houaea shouldn't throw Stonaa." 
The Two Hardoaatlaa. 
SaaVIng a Pity. 
Xhodal Baward. 
Jaok ICarston's Axushor. 



Frank's Lifo-Battla. 

Xajor KonJL*B- Motto; or, **Iiook Before 

you Zioap.** 
Tim Thomson's Trial; or, ** All la not Gold 

that OUttars.** 



nk«ula*s Stnmbling-Blook. 
Buth's LUIs-WoriL; or. * 

Oalna.** 
Bags and Balobowa. 
Unole William's Ctiarga. 
Pratty Pink's Purpoae. 



Ko Palna, no 



Books for Tonng People. Price as. 6d. each. 



Heroes of Xvery-day Z<ife. By Laura Lana. 

niimrated. 
Daoisive Brents In Hlatory. By Thomas 

ArclMT. With Orifiiaal lUustratkma. 
The True Bobinson Oruaoea. 
Saepa Abroad fbr Folka at Home. Illus* 

tiated. 



IBua- 



Barly Bzplorars. By Thooas Frost 
Home Chat with our Tonng Folka. 
trated throuir>^ouL 

Jungle, Peak, and Plain. lUnstrated tttfough. 
out 

The World's Lnmber Boom. By Selina Gaya^ 



**Ckflden Mottoes" Series, The. Each Book containing ao8 pages, with Four 
full-page Original Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, as. each. 

"Honour la my Ghiide." By Jeanie Heriiig 



'VU 



idum." By the Rer. F. Lang> 



m Desperan^ 
brfclKa,M.A. 

**Baar and Forbear." . By Sarah Pht 
"Foremost If I Can.** Bf Helm AtteridgSb 



(Mn. AdalIlS^Actoll). 
** Aim at a Sure Xud." By EmUy S«archfield. 
** Be Conquers who Sndurea.*'^ By tlie Autlior 

of " May Cunningham's Trial.'* &c 



The "Gross and Grown" Series. Consisting of Stories founded on incidents 
which occurred duriog Religious Persecutions of Past Dajrs. With Illustrations in 
eadi Book. as. 6d. each. 



Br 1r« And Sword: a Story of the 
Hngnanota. By Thooas Archer. 

Adam Hepbnm'a Tow: a Tale of Kirk 
and Covenant. By Annie S. Swan. 

Vo. XIII ; or. The Story of the I«oat 
VestaL By EaoDia ManhaU. 



Strong to BnfDnr. By E. Wynne. 

H a r oea of the Indian Bmplre; or, S^orlea 

of Talonr and Vlotory. By Emast Foster. 
In Lattara of Flame: A Story of thj 

Waldanaea. By C L. Matteux. 
Through Trial to Tllnmph. By Madelina 



Tlie World's Workers. A Series of 

Authors. Witn i'ortraits printed on a 

Dr. Arnold, of Bucby. By Rom E. Selte. 

The Barl of Shafteabury. 

¦arah BoUnaon. Agnee Weeton. and Mrs. 

ICaradlth. 
Thomaa A. Bdlaon and Samuel F. B 



Somerrllla and Xary Carpantar. 
nral Oordon. 
^'lea Slokana. 
Titna Salt and Oaorge Moore. 

Nli^tingale. cSltherine Marah. 
¦a Bld@ H^^ 




New and Original Volumes by Popular 
tint as Frontispiece, xs. each. 

Dr. Oathrle, Father Mathew, Bllhu Bur> 

rltt, Joarah laTeaey. 
Sir Haiiry HaTelook and CtoUn Oan^ball. 

liord Clyde. 
Ateaham Unooln. 
David lilTlngatone. 
Oeorga^lfnller and Andrew Baad. 
Biohard Oobden. 
Benjamin Franklin. 



Tnmar tha Artist. 
Qeorga and Bobart 



Silcrdem fimn Cattill 4 Camfianyi J^iilicalieiu. 

ItT* Miming- Booki (or Tonng ^opl*. With Original lUnsmtioni. Cloth 
(ilt, SL each. "" 

Ilw BominwarfDnBUDn. >•]•>. Bunilnr. I _ oflh* Iai»m. By Ju Hon. Mr». C 

Tbfl Ghuiplaa or Odin i or, VlUnv lAn I Tlu Xluc^ comniAnd, A &toiT ftv OMb 
U lh*Dlv* of Old. ^ J. PkL Hodfini. I Bt HioW SratafiK 



. 7 Book* tor TottBg PMpl*. With Ori^nal lUus 

CllKh gilt, JL 6cL euh. 
ol^ ' A Kow^Hhlonad CMrL Br 1. T ~ ~ ~ - - -- 






u-c 



nia IWertoot BeHSB. By Edward S. Ellis, Auihor of " Boy Pioneer Seriei,' 
&c. &C. With Four rull-pagc llliuiruieu in uch Boak. CkHh, n. 6d. cuh. 



Tha "B07 FltmaBr" BsrlaL By EdwaKD & Elue. With Four Full-Dut 
UluuniiDu in «di Book. Crown Bto, cloth, «. «d. e«h. 
V*i in thcWoedL A TU> n) Eirir Dtjt l Had on Itio BlTR, A Tik nf I>dlm Uw 



The "Log; Oatilu"B«TlM. By EnwAKt) S. £llis. With Four FuU-pon Uloi- 
inuoiuiocuh. Cron tvD. cloth, u. dd. uch. 

Oiunp-yu» ud Wlcnam. 






Blxptnny Stoty ioota. All llliattaied, and containiag Inieraiing Storiet tqr 

Tho BmUMlW. C»"- I UrtloMrd. I Kr Tlimt CnlM. 

CuibU'b Plctura Story Book*. Each cotnainiaE 6o Ptr* at Pictuia aad 

Uttls Tllkb 1 DuliT'l Starr Book. I AnntloV StorUa. 

Brlolit Blara. Dot-i Storr SoBk. Btrdlo-o Blarr Book. 

Mmwrr JojI. A IlHt at^tnTlH, Iilltl* Ohlm^ 

p«-i Pon. Oflod NlBht Btm«. 1 ABOitlotlL 

Tiny TalH. I ChMtM fbr Small Cbaltoraia. 1 Dawdrop 61 






^]h imia for (mildrML Price 31. 6d. each. 



StlictiMU fnm Catiell i Company i PublUaSffta. 

Plotnn TMohlnc SarlM. EAch book lUuimied througfaoat. Pcap. 410^ a 
cOl, ealound (dgEi, u. M. ach. 

Ptonm T"-'"-r foi Teonc u4 Old. Mmk and hU nook, 

ivrapfl of Klw«U4ff« for th« LltEl* £?¦¦£ Tlih-Ttwr rkaliy, 

__ oSm. I TO* apt y'''°*g ™* .^!'T? J^** 



nhutnud GiTl-booki for Bojn. Pkper 11. ; doth, u. 64. 

«, r Wonderful BaUoan Aaevitt. 

luUBM. I Wandv* eTBoSiTaBvwIli and ¦UD. 

Woad«rnl Bi «p —. 



B«eki tor tlM UtUa Onw. Full; lUnitnted. 

A Down «nd Onei Di\Tk» BolJ»Bl Tk^Cnd ^^TbI^ 

Brln' FuU ol lijuTli.tli.ni! Si-' XT IHuT. Wtk -Kiilm 

^ik^tvwii BBuitfuDi DIiulntBl. m bl. -Unli Tulka^Altnu 
Ttaa UfUa Dcilaca gf Hm> l-lttls TolKI. ni<i«iiMil. a. M. 

.lud ^$lua ffcSBH. BhtiU. ». 1 dsk, 1''\ . ' °<> 

Dajav LHiapl*^ Sarap _Boak- CnUiDl^ IUl.l. I' ' E ...^' ' it, 

^ta« Lima FoLkB' ^t'and Xbotlt Book. Oar Lluto ^rlBuda. n< 

± Paroal of ChUdrtD. Bv OUr* Pjirch, w£ Tbfl BEOry of Babla a 

UtUa Talk!' Plalnr* Albom. 'mb iM Tba PUirlin-a Fra(n 
UtUsVolkJ' Pllffnra OnOarr. Whli igfr 



Book! for all OUldrwL 



ohhK iwiH *¦ ._. . . 

tnnd. LkKb. a. td, : (Ut cdia, a. 
•bbst Snln: IB Puplaand riMom. 
^rtOk BUmpHl of !{• BlMUirj, Bj 

BUnblas Boiind London IVwn. Bj^CL. Aronad and Kbouf Qld BnirUuid. lUuitTt 

MaUauK- IKuHEacad. ft- S«>rdi. p. ed. : cl«b. nUr adEs. ». 

PftmUlar Fnaoda. ^ OBn Ptick. Bbm- Taw a and claw*. IDiunaiad. Boan^ «. 4 

nraiad. CkvhrUt.o. clocn. pit Ddir«t. ^ 

OOd foUu « boat. Bt C L. MalteoL nm TnScbls'a -Uala ¦CoCllA'.- B^ C 



iniiiiiiiiiii 

3 2044 036 351 "o" 



This book should bo rotomod to 
the Library od or berora the lut date 



A Hue or are oents a day la Inotured 
hy retAiDing it beyond the upaolfled 



Please return promptly. 



JML 15 



o«»«^* 





